Skin Cancer Screening - NCI Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Español Menu Search Search About Cancer Cancer Types Research Grants & Training News & Events About NCI Home Cancer Types Skin Cancer Patient Skin Cancer Screening (PDQ®)–Patient Version Print Email Skin Cancer Patient Skin Cancer Treatment Childhood Basal & Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Skin Treatment Melanoma Treatment Childhood Melanoma Treatment Merkel Cell Carcinoma Treatment Skin Cancer Prevention Skin Cancer Screening Health Professional Research Advances Skin Cancer Screening (PDQ®)–Patient Version On This Page What is screening? General Information About Skin Cancer Skin Cancer Screening Risks of Skin Cancer Screening About This PDQ Summary What is screening? Go to Health Professional Version Screening is  looking for cancer before a person has any symptoms . This can help find
		cancer at an early stage . When abnormal tissue or cancer is found early, it may
		be easier to treat. By the time symptoms  appear, cancer may have begun
		to  spread. Scientists are trying to better understand which
		people are more likely to get certain types of cancer. They also study the things
		we do and the things around us to see if they cause  cancer. This
		information helps doctors recommend who should be screened for cancer, which
		screening tests should be used, and how often the tests should be done. It is important to remember that your doctor does not necessarily
		think you have cancer if he or she suggests a  screening test. Screening
		tests are given when you  have no cancer symptoms. If a screening test result is abnormal, you may need to have more tests done to find out if you have cancer. These are called diagnostic tests . General Information About Skin Cancer Key Points Skin cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form
		  in the tissues of the skin. Skin cancer is the most common cancer in the United
		  States. Different factors increase or decrease 
         the risk of skin cancer. Skin cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form
		  in the tissues of the skin. The skin is the body's largest organ . It protects against heat,
		  sunlight, injury, and infection . Skin also helps  control body temperature and stores water, fat, and vitamin D .  The skin has several layers, but the two main layers are the epidermis (top or outer layer) and the dermis (lower or inner layer). Skin cancer begins in the epidermis, which is made up of three kinds of cells : Squamous cells :  Thin, flat cells that form  the top layer  of the epidermis. Cancer that forms in squamous cells is called squamous cell carcinoma of the skin . Basal cells : Round cells under the squamous cells. Cancer that forms in basal cells is called basal cell carcinoma . Melanocytes :  Found
		  in the lower part of the epidermis, these cells make melanin , the pigment that gives skin its natural color. When skin is exposed to the sun, melanocytes
		  make more pigment and cause the skin to tan, or darken.      Cancer that forms in melanocytes is called melanoma . Enlarge Anatomy of the skin, showing the epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous tissue. Skin cancer is the most common cancer in the United
		  States. There are two main types of skin cancer: Nonmelanoma or keratinocyte carcinoma which includes: Squamous cell carcinoma [SCC]. Basal cell carcinoma. Melanoma. Basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the skin, also called  nonmelanoma skin cancer or keratinocyte carcinoma, are the most common forms of skin cancer. Most basal cell and squamous cell
		  skin cancers can be cured . Melanoma is more likely to spread to nearby tissues and other parts of the body and can be harder to cure. Melanoma is easier to cure if the tumor is found before it spreads to the dermis (inner layer of skin). Melanoma is less likely to cause death when it is found and treated early. Enlarge Anatomy of the skin, showing the epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous tissue. Melanocytes are in the layer of basal cells at the deepest part of the epidermis. In the United States, about 3 million cases of nonmelanoma skin cancer or keratinocyte carcinoma are diagnosed  each year, and rates have likely been increasing for decades but have recently stabilized.  Greater public awareness has led to higher rates of screening exams, self-exams, and detection of these skin cancers. Since the early 2000s, the rate of melanoma cases in adults younger than 50 years has held steady in women, but decreased by about 1% per year in men. From 2015 to 2019, the rate of melanoma cases  in adults aged 50 years and older appeared to hold steady in men, but increased by about 1% per year in women. From 2011 to 2020, the number of deaths from melanoma decreased by about 5% per year in adults younger than 50 years and by 3% per year in adults  aged 50 years and older. The rate of melanoma cases in children and adolescents increased until 2002. However, between 2002 and 2019, the yearly rates of melanoma  in these age groups  decreased slightly. For more information about skin cancer, see the following: Skin Cancer Prevention Skin Cancer Treatment Melanoma Treatment Genetics of Skin Cancer Childhood Melanoma Childhood Basal Cell Carcinoma and Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Skin Different factors increase or decrease 
         the risk of skin cancer. Anything that increases your chance of getting a disease
		  is called a risk factor . Anything that decreases your chance of getting a disease is called a protective factor . For information about risk and protective factors for skin cancer, see Skin Cancer Prevention . Skin Cancer Screening Key Points Tests are used to screen for different types of cancer when a person does not have symptoms. Screening for   skin cancer may include examination by both the patient and the health care provider. Screening tests for skin cancer are being studied in clinical trials. Tests are used to screen for different types of cancer when a person does not have symptoms. Scientists study screening tests to find those with the fewest harms and most benefits. Cancer screening trials also are meant to show whether early detection (finding cancer before it causes symptoms )  helps a person live longer or decreases a person's chance of dying from the disease. For some types of cancer, the chance of recovery is better if the disease is found and treated at an early stage . There is not enough  evidence to know if screening the population  for skin cancer lowers the rates of death from skin cancer. Screening for   skin cancer may include examination by both the patient and the health care provider. A visual self-exam by the patient and a clinical examination by the health care provider may be used to screen for skin cancer. During a skin exam a doctor or nurse checks the skin for moles , birthmarks, or other pigmented areas that look abnormal in color, size, shape, or texture.  Skin exams to screen for skin cancer have not been shown to decrease the number of deaths from the disease. Regular skin checks by a doctor are important for people who have
		  already had skin cancer. If you are checking your skin and find a worrisome change, you should report it to your doctor. If an area on the skin looks
			 abnormal, a biopsy is usually done. The doctor will remove as much of the suspicious tissue as possible with a local excision . A pathologist then looks at the
			 tissue under a microscope to check
			 for cancer cells .  Because it is sometimes difficult to tell if a skin growth is benign (not cancer) or malignant (cancer),  you may want to have the biopsy sample checked by a second pathologist. Most melanomas in the skin can be seen by the
		  naked eye. Usually, melanoma grows for a long time under 
		  the top layer of skin (the epidermis ) but does not grow into the deeper layer of skin (the dermis ). This allows time for skin cancer to be found early.  Melanoma is easier to cure if it  is found before it spreads. Mobile phone applications ("apps")  that evaluate skin lesions to detect skin cancer and malignant melanoma have been developed. However, these apps require further study in large-scale testing programs to find out if they are accurate and useful for skin cancer screening. Screening tests for skin cancer are being studied in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials supported by NCI can be found on NCI’s clinical trials search webpage. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. Risks of Skin Cancer Screening Key Points Screening tests have risks. The risks of skin cancer screening tests include the following: Finding skin cancer does not always   improve health or help you live
			 longer. False-negative test results can occur. False-positive test results can occur. A biopsy may cause scarring. Screening tests have risks. Decisions about screening tests can be difficult. Not all screening tests are helpful and most have risks. Before having any screening test, you may
		  want to discuss  the test with your doctor.  It is important to know the risks of
		  the test and whether it has been proven to reduce the risk of dying from cancer . The risks of skin cancer screening tests include the following: Finding skin cancer does not always   improve health or help you live
			 longer. Screening
			 may not improve your health or help  you live longer if  you have advanced skin cancer . Some cancers  never  cause symptoms or become life-threatening, but if    found by a screening
			 test,  the cancer may be treated. Treatments for cancer may have serious side effects . False-negative test results can occur. Screening test results may appear to be normal even though cancer is
			 present. A person who receives a false-negative test result (one that
			 shows there is no cancer when there really is) may delay getting medical care  even if there are symptoms. False-positive test results can occur. Screening test results may appear to be abnormal even though no
			 cancer is present. A false-positive test result (one that shows there is cancer when there really isn't) can cause anxiety and is usually followed by more  tests  (such as
			  a biopsy ), which also have risks. A biopsy may cause scarring. When a skin biopsy is done, the doctor will try to leave the
			 smallest scar possible, but there is a risk of scarring and infection . Talk to your doctor about your risk for skin cancer and your need for screening tests. About This PDQ Summary About PDQ Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish . PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. Purpose of This Summary This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about skin cancer screening.  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Reviewers and Updates Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Screening and Prevention Editorial Board . Clinical Trial Information A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website . For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). Permission to Use This Summary PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Screening and Prevention Editorial Board. PDQ Skin Cancer Screening. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/skin/patient/skin-screening-pdq .  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389182] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online . Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. Disclaimer The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. Contact Us More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us . Updated: March 30, 2023 If you would like to reproduce some or all of this content, see Reuse of NCI Information for guidance about copyright and permissions. In the case of permitted digital reproduction, please credit the National Cancer Institute as the source and link to the original NCI product using the original product's title; e.g., “Skin Cancer Screening (PDQ®)–Patient Version was originally published by the National Cancer Institute.” Want to use this content on your website or other digital platform? Our syndication services page shows you how. Print Email Back To Top About About This Website en Español Reuse & Copyright Social Media Resources Contact Us Publications Dictionary of Cancer Terms Find a Clinical Trial Policies Accessibility FOIA Privacy & Security Disclaimers Vulnerability Disclosure Sign up for email updates Enter your email address Sign up National Cancer Institute at the National Institutes of Health Contact Us Live Chat 1-800-4-CANCER NCIinfo@nih.gov Site Feedback Follow us Facebook Follow on X Instagram Youtube Linkedin U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health National Cancer Institute USA.gov