Childhood Liver Cancer - NCI Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Español Menu Search Search About Cancer Cancer Types Research Grants & Training News & Events About NCI Home Cancer Types Liver & Bile Duct Cancer Childhood Liver Cancer Print Email Liver & Bile Duct Cancer Liver Cancer Bile Duct Cancer (Cholangiocarcinoma) Childhood Liver Cancer Hepatoblastoma Childhood Hepatocellular Carcinoma Childhood Undifferentiated Embryonal Sarcoma of the Liver Infantile Choriocarcinoma of the Liver Health Professional Research Advances Childhood Liver Cancer Liver cancer is rare in children. There are several different types of childhood liver cancer. The most common type is hepatoblastoma. The other less common types of childhood liver cancer are hepatocellular carcinoma, undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver, infantile choriocarcinoma of the liver, and fibrolamellar carcinoma. Certain diseases and conditions can increase the risk of childhood liver cancer. Explore the links on this page to learn more about the different types of liver cancer that can occur in children and adolescents, including causes and risk factors, how the cancer is found, and how it is treated. Hepatoblastoma Hepatoblastoma is the most common type of childhood liver cancer. Learn about causes, risk factors, signs, symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options. Childhood Hepatocellular Carcinoma Childhood hepatocellular carcinoma is a rare type of childhood liver cancer. Learn about causes, risk factors, signs, symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options. Childhood Undifferentiated Embryonal Sarcoma of the Liver Childhood undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver is a rare type of childhood liver cancer. Learn about causes, risk factors, signs, symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options. Infantile Choriocarcinoma of the Liver Infantile choriocarcinoma of the liver is a very rare type of childhood liver cancer. Learn about causes, risk factors, signs, symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options. Fibrolamellar Carcinoma Fibrolamellar carcinoma is a very rare cancer of the liver that usually grows in teens and young adults. Learn more about fibrolamellar carcinoma from NCI's Pediatric and Adult Rare Tumor Network. Print Email Back To Top About About This Website en Español Reuse & Copyright Social Media Resources Contact Us Publications Dictionary of Cancer Terms Find a Clinical Trial Policies Accessibility FOIA Privacy & Security Disclaimers Vulnerability Disclosure Sign up for email updates Enter your email address Sign up National Cancer Institute at the National Institutes of Health Contact Us Live Chat 1-800-4-CANCER NCIinfo@nih.gov Site Feedback Follow us Facebook Follow on X Instagram Youtube Linkedin U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health National Cancer Institute USA.gov