Parathyroid Cancer Treatment - NCI Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Español Menu Search Search About Cancer Cancer Types Research Grants & Training News & Events About NCI Home Cancer Types Parathyroid Cancer Patient Parathyroid Cancer Treatment (PDQ®)–Patient Version Print Email Parathyroid Cancer Patient Parathyroid Cancer Treatment Health Professional Parathyroid Cancer Treatment (PDQ®)–Patient Version On This Page General Information About Parathyroid Cancer Stages of Parathyroid Cancer Treatment Option Overview Treatment of Localized Parathyroid Cancer Treatment of Metastatic Parathyroid Cancer Treatment of Recurrent Parathyroid Cancer To Learn More About Parathyroid Cancer About This PDQ Summary General Information About Parathyroid Cancer Go to Health Professional Version Key Points Parathyroid cancer is a rare disease in which malignant (cancer)
		  cells form in the tissues of a parathyroid gland. Having certain inherited disorders can increase
		  the risk of developing parathyroid cancer. Signs and symptoms of parathyroid cancer include weakness, feeling tired, and a lump in the neck. Tests that examine the neck and blood are used to diagnose parathyroid cancer. Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Parathyroid cancer is a rare disease in which malignant (cancer)
		  cells form in the tissues of a parathyroid gland. The parathyroid glands are four pea-sized organs found in the neck
		  near the thyroid gland . The parathyroid glands make parathyroid hormone (PTH or parathormone). PTH helps the body use and store calcium to keep the calcium in the blood at normal levels. Enlarge Anatomy of the thyroid and parathyroid glands. The thyroid gland lies at the base of the throat near the trachea. It is shaped like a butterfly, with the right lobe and left lobe connected by a thin piece of tissue called the isthmus. The parathyroid glands are four pea-sized organs found in the neck near the thyroid. The thyroid and parathyroid glands make hormones. A parathyroid gland may become overactive and make too much PTH,
		  a condition called hyperparathyroidism . Hyperparathyroidism can occur when a benign tumor (noncancer), called an adenoma , forms on one of the parathyroid glands, and causes it to grow and become overactive.  Sometimes hyperparathyroidism can be caused by parathyroid cancer , but this is very rare. The extra PTH causes: The calcium stored in the bones
		  to move into the blood. The intestines to absorb
		  more calcium from the food we eat. This condition is called hypercalcemia (too much calcium in the blood). The hypercalcemia caused by hyperparathyroidism is more serious and life-threatening than parathyroid cancer itself and treating hypercalcemia is as important as treating the cancer . Having certain inherited disorders can increase
		  the risk of developing parathyroid cancer. Anything that increases the chance of getting a disease is called a risk factor . Risk factors for parathyroid cancer include the following rare disorders that are inherited (passed down from parent to child): Familial isolated hyperparathyroidism (FIHP). Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1   (MEN1) syndrome . Treatment with radiation therapy may increase the risk of developing a parathyroid adenoma. Signs and symptoms of parathyroid cancer include weakness, feeling tired, and a lump in the neck. Most parathyroid cancer signs and symptoms are caused by  the hypercalcemia that develops. Signs and symptoms of hypercalcemia include: Weakness. Feeling very tired. Nausea and vomiting . Loss of appetite . Weight loss for no known reason. Being much more  thirsty than usual. Urinating much more than usual. Constipation . Trouble thinking clearly. Other signs and symptoms of parathyroid cancer include: Pain in the abdomen , side, or back that doesn't go away. Pain in the bones. A broken bone. A lump in the neck. Change in voice such as hoarseness. Trouble swallowing. Other conditions may cause the same signs and symptoms as parathyroid cancer. Check with your doctor if you have any of these problems. To learn more about some of these symptoms, visit: Cancer Pain Nutrition During Cancer Treatment (for weight loss information) Nausea and Vomiting and Cancer Treatment Tests that examine the neck and blood are used to diagnose parathyroid cancer. Once blood tests are done and hyperparathyroidism is diagnosed , imaging tests may be done to help find which of the parathyroid glands is overactive. Sometimes the parathyroid glands are hard to find and imaging tests are done to find exactly where they are. Parathyroid cancer may be hard to diagnose because the cells of a benign parathyroid adenoma and a malignant parathyroid cancer look alike. The patient's symptoms, blood levels of calcium and parathyroid hormone , and characteristics of the tumor are also used to make a diagnosis. In addition to asking about your personal and family health history and doing a physical exam , your doctor may perform the following tests and procedures: Blood chemistry studies : A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by organs and tissues in the body. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease.  To diagnose parathyroid cancer, the sample of blood is checked for its calcium level. Parathyroid hormone test : A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amount of parathyroid hormone released into the blood by the parathyroid glands. A higher than normal amount of parathyroid hormone can be a sign of disease. Sestamibi scan (MIBG scan) : A type of radionuclide scan used to find an overactive parathyroid gland. A very small amount of a radioactive substance called technetium 99 is injected into a vein and travels through the bloodstream to the parathyroid gland. The radioactive substance will collect in the overactive gland and show up brightly on a special camera that detects radioactivity. CT scan (CAT scan) : A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles.  The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly.  This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. Enlarge Computed tomography (CT) scan of the head and neck. The patient lies on a table that slides through the CT scanner, which takes x-ray pictures of the inside of the head and neck. SPECT scan (single photon emission computed tomography scan) : A procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the neck. A small amount of a radioactive substance is injected into a vein or inhaled through the nose. As the substance travels through the blood, a camera rotates around the body and takes pictures of the neck. A computer uses the pictures to make a 3-dimensional (3-D) image of the neck. There will be increased blood flow and more activity in areas where cancer cells are growing. These areas will show up brighter in the picture. Ultrasound exam : A procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs and make echoes.  The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram . Angiogram :  A procedure to look at blood vessels and the flow of blood.  A contrast dye is injected into the blood vessel.  As the contrast dye moves through the blood vessel, x-rays are taken to see if there are any blockages. Venous sampling : A procedure in which a sample of blood is taken from specific veins and checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by nearby organs and tissues. If imaging tests do not show which parathyroid gland is overactive, blood samples may be taken from veins near each parathyroid gland to find which one is making too much PTH. Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis and treatment options depend on: Whether the calcium level in the blood can be controlled. The stage of the cancer. Whether the tumor and the capsule around the tumor can be completely removed by surgery . The patient's general health. Stages of Parathyroid Cancer Key Points After parathyroid cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread  to other parts of the body. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. Parathyroid cancer  is described as either localized
		  or metastatic. Parathyroid cancer can recur (come back) after it has been treated. After parathyroid cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread  to other parts of the body. The process used to find out if cancer has spread to other parts of the body is called staging .  There is no standard staging system for parathyroid cancer . The following imaging tests may be used to find out if the cancer has spread to other parts of the body such as the lungs , liver , bone, heart, pancreas , or lymph nodes : CT scan (CAT scan) : A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles.  The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly.  This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. Enlarge Computed tomography (CT) scan of the head and neck. The patient lies on a table that slides through the CT scanner, which takes x-ray pictures of the inside of the head and neck. MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) : A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue , the lymph system , and the blood : Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis . Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor ) and travel through the lymph system or blood. Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor ( metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if parathyroid cancer spreads to the lung, the cancer cells in the lung are actually parathyroid cancer cells. The disease is metastatic parathyroid cancer, not lung cancer. Many cancer deaths are caused when cancer moves from the original tumor and spreads to other tissues and organs. This is called metastatic cancer. This animation shows how cancer cells travel from the place in the body where they first formed to other parts of the body. Parathyroid cancer  is described as either localized
		  or metastatic. Localized parathyroid cancer is found in a parathyroid gland and may have spread to nearby tissues. Metastatic parathyroid cancer has spread to other parts of
			 the body, such as the lungs, liver, bone, sac around the heart, pancreas, or lymph nodes. Parathyroid cancer can recur (come back) after it has been treated. The cancer may come back in the tissues or lymph nodes of the neck or in other parts of the body. More than half of patients have a recurrence. The parathyroid cancer usually recurs between 2 and 5 years after the first surgery , but can recur up to 20 years later. It usually comes back in the tissues or lymph nodes of the neck. High blood calcium levels that appear after treatment may be the first sign of recurrence. Treatment Option Overview Key Points There are different types of treatment for patients with
		  parathyroid cancer. Treatment includes control of hypercalcemia (too much calcium in the blood) in patients who have  an overactive parathyroid gland. The following types of treatment are used: Surgery Radiation therapy Chemotherapy Supportive care New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Treatment for parathyroid cancer may cause side effects. Follow-up care may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with
		  parathyroid cancer. Different types of treatment are available for patients with parathyroid cancer . Some treatments are standard (the currently used
		  treatment), and some are being tested in clinical
		  trials .  A treatment clinical trial is a research
		  study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new
		  treatments for patients with cancer . When clinical trials show that a new
		  treatment is better than the standard
		  treatment, the new treatment may become the standard
		  treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Treatment includes control of hypercalcemia (too much calcium in the blood) in patients who have  an overactive parathyroid gland. In order to  reduce the amount of parathyroid hormone that is being made and control the level of calcium in the blood , as much of the tumor as possible is removed in surgery . For patients who cannot have  surgery, medication may be used. The following types of treatment are used: Surgery Surgery (removing the
			 cancer in an operation) is the most common treatment for parathyroid cancer that is in the parathyroid glands or has spread to other parts of the body. Because parathyroid cancer grows very slowly, cancer that has spread to other parts of the body may be removed by surgery in order to cure the patient or control the effects of the disease for a long time. Before
			 surgery, treatment is given to control hypercalcemia . The following surgical procedures may be used: En bloc resection : Surgery to remove the entire parathyroid gland and the capsule around it. Sometimes lymph nodes ,  half of the thyroid gland on the same side of the body as the cancer, and muscles, tissues , and a nerve in the neck are also removed. Tumor debulking : A surgical procedure in which as much of the tumor as possible is removed. Some tumors cannot be completely removed. Metastasectomy : Surgery to remove any cancer that has spread to distant organs such as the lung . Surgery for parathyroid cancer sometimes damages nerves of the vocal cords . There are treatments to help with speech problems caused by this nerve damage. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing.  There are two types of radiation therapy: External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the area of the body with cancer. Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds , wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. Enlarge External-beam radiation therapy of the head and neck. A machine is used to aim high-energy radiation at the cancer. The machine can rotate around the patient, delivering radiation from many different angles to provide highly conformal treatment. A mesh mask helps keep the patient’s head and neck from moving during treatment. Small ink marks are put on the mask. The ink marks are used to line up the radiation machine in the same position before each treatment. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. External radiation therapy is used to treat parathyroid cancer. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body ( systemic chemotherapy ).  When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid , an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen , the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas ( regional chemotherapy ). The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. Supportive care Supportive care is given to lessen the problems caused by the disease or its treatment. Supportive care for  caused by parathyroid cancer may include: Intravenous (IV) fluids . Drugs that increase how much urine the body makes. Drugs that stop the body from absorbing calcium from the food we eat. Drugs that stop the parathyroid gland from making parathyroid hormone. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. For some people, joining a clinical trial may be an option. There are different types of clinical trials for people with cancer. For example, a treatment trial tests new treatments or new ways of using current treatments. Supportive care and palliative care trials look at ways to improve quality of life, especially for those who have side effects from cancer and its treatment. You can use the clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials accepting participants. The search allows you to filter trials based on the type of cancer, your age, and where the trials are being done. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. Learn more about clinical trials, including how to find and join one, at Clinical Trials Information for Patients and Caregivers . Treatment for parathyroid cancer may cause side effects. For information about side effects caused by treatment for cancer, visit our Side Effects page. Follow-up care may be needed. As you go through treatment, you  will have follow-up tests or check-ups. Some tests that were done to diagnose or stage the cancer may be repeated to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). Parathyroid cancer often recurs . Patients should have regular check-ups for the rest of their lives, to find and treat recurrences early. Treatment of Localized Parathyroid Cancer Treatment of localized parathyroid cancer may include: Surgery (en bloc resection ). Surgery followed by radiation
			 therapy . Radiation therapy. Supportive care to treat (too much calcium in the blood ). Learn more about these treatments in the Treatment Option Overview . Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information about clinical trials is also available. Treatment of Metastatic Parathyroid Cancer Treatment of metastatic parathyroid cancer may include: Surgery ( metastasectomy ) to remove cancer from the places where it has spread. Surgery followed by radiation therapy . Radiation therapy. Chemotherapy . Supportive care to treat hypercalcemia (too much calcium in the blood ). Learn more about these treatments in the Treatment Option Overview . Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information about clinical trials is also available. Treatment of Recurrent Parathyroid Cancer Treatment of recurrent parathyroid cancer may include: Surgery ( metastasectomy ) to remove cancer from the places where it has recurred . Surgery ( tumor debulking ). Surgery followed by radiation therapy . Radiation therapy. Chemotherapy . Supportive care to treat hypercalcemia (too much calcium in the blood ). Learn more about these treatments in the Treatment Option Overview . Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information about clinical trials is also available. To Learn More About Parathyroid Cancer For more information from the National Cancer Institute about  parathyroid cancer, visit the Parathyroid Cancer Home Page . For general cancer information and other resources from the National Cancer Institute, visit: About Cancer Cancer Staging Chemotherapy and You: Support for People With Cancer Radiation Therapy and You: Support for People With Cancer Coping with Cancer Questions to Ask Your Doctor about Cancer For Survivors, Caregivers, and Advocates About This PDQ Summary About PDQ Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish . PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. Purpose of This Summary This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about the treatment of parathyroid cancer.  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Reviewers and Updates Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board . Clinical Trial Information A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website . For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). Permission to Use This Summary PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Adult Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Parathyroid Cancer Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/parathyroid/patient/parathyroid-treatment-pdq .  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389349] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online . Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. Disclaimer The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. Contact Us More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us . Updated: March 7, 2025 If you would like to reproduce some or all of this content, see Reuse of NCI Information for guidance about copyright and permissions. In the case of permitted digital reproduction, please credit the National Cancer Institute as the source and link to the original NCI product using the original product's title; e.g., “Parathyroid Cancer Treatment (PDQ®)–Patient Version was originally published by the National Cancer Institute.” Want to use this content on your website or other digital platform? Our syndication services page shows you how. Print Email Back To Top About About This Website en Español Reuse & Copyright Social Media Resources Contact Us Publications Dictionary of Cancer Terms Find a Clinical Trial Policies Accessibility FOIA Privacy & Security Disclaimers Vulnerability Disclosure Sign up for email updates Enter your email address Sign up National Cancer Institute at the National Institutes of Health Contact Us Live Chat 1-800-4-CANCER NCIinfo@nih.gov Site Feedback Follow us Facebook Follow on X Instagram Youtube Linkedin U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health National Cancer Institute USA.gov