Gallbladder Cancer Treatment - NCI Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Español Menu Search Search About Cancer Cancer Types Research Grants & Training News & Events About NCI Home Cancer Types Gallbladder Cancer Patient Gallbladder Cancer Treatment (PDQ®)–Patient Version Print Email Gallbladder Cancer Patient Gallbladder Cancer Treatment Health Professional Gallbladder Cancer Treatment (PDQ®)–Patient Version On This Page General Information About Gallbladder Cancer Stages of Gallbladder Cancer Treatment Option Overview Treatment of Localized  and Locally Advanced Gallbladder Cancer Treatment of Unresectable, Metastatic, or Recurrent Gallbladder Cancer To Learn More About Gallbladder Cancer About This PDQ Summary General Information About Gallbladder Cancer Go to Health Professional Version Key Points Gallbladder cancer is a rare type of cancer that starts in the tissues of the gallbladder. Signs and symptoms of gallbladder cancer include jaundice, fever, and pain. Gallbladder cancer is difficult to detect (find) and diagnose early. Tests that examine the gallbladder and nearby organs are used to detect (find), diagnose, and stage gallbladder cancer. Certain factors affect the prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Gallbladder cancer is a rare type of cancer that starts in the tissues of the gallbladder. Gallbladder cancer occurs when cells in the gallbladder start to grow out of control. The gallbladder is a pear-shaped organ that lies just under the liver in the upper abdomen . The gallbladder stores bile , a fluid made by the liver to digest fat. When food is being broken down in the stomach and intestines , bile is released from the gallbladder through a tube called the common bile duct , which connects the gallbladder and liver to the first part of the small intestine . Enlarge Anatomy of the gallbladder. The gallbladder is just below the liver. Bile is stored in the gallbladder and flows through the cystic duct and the common bile duct into the small intestine when food is being digested. The wall of the gallbladder  has  4 main layers of tissue: mucosal (inner) layer muscle layer connective tissue layer serosal (outer) layer Primary gallbladder cancer starts in the inner layer and spreads through the outer layers as it grows. Signs and symptoms of gallbladder cancer include jaundice, fever, and pain. These and other signs and symptoms may be caused by gallbladder cancer or by other conditions. Check with your doctor if you have any of the  following: jaundice (yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes) pain above the stomach fever nausea and vomiting bloating lumps in the abdomen Gallbladder cancer is difficult to detect (find) and diagnose early. Gallbladder cancer is difficult to detect and diagnose for the
		  following reasons: People rarely have signs or symptoms in the early
			 stages of gallbladder
			 cancer. The symptoms of gallbladder cancer, when present, are like the
			 symptoms of many other illnesses. The gallbladder is hidden behind the liver. Gallbladder cancer is sometimes found when the gallbladder is removed for other reasons. Although gallstones are the most common risk factor for developing gallbladder cancer, the overall risk is low. Most people with gallstones do not develop gallbladder cancer. Tests that examine the gallbladder and nearby organs are used to detect (find), diagnose, and stage gallbladder cancer. Procedures
		  that  make pictures of the gallbladder and the area around it help diagnose gallbladder cancer and show how far the cancer has spread. The process used
		  to find out if cancer cells have spread within and around the gallbladder is
		  called staging. To plan treatment, it is important to know  if the gallbladder cancer can be removed by
		  surgery. Tests and procedures
		  to detect, diagnose, and stage gallbladder cancer are usually done at the same
		  time. In addition to asking about your personal and family health history and doing a physical exam , your doctor may perform the following tests and procedures: Liver function tests : A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by the liver.  A higher than normal amount of a substance can  be a sign of liver disease that may be caused by gallbladder cancer. Blood chemistry studies : A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by organs and tissues in the body. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease. CT scan (CAT
			 scan) : A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the chest, abdomen, and pelvis , taken from different angles.  The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine.  A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. Ultrasound exam : A procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs and make echoes.  The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram . An abdominal ultrasound is done to diagnose gallbladder cancer. PTC (percutaneous
			 transhepatic cholangiography) : A procedure used to x-ray the liver and bile ducts .  A thin needle is inserted through the skin below the ribs and into the liver.  Dye is injected into the liver or bile ducts and an x-ray is taken.  If a blockage is found, a thin, flexible tube called a stent is sometimes left in the liver to drain bile into the small intestine or a collection bag outside the body. ERCP (endoscopic
			 retrograde cholangiopancreatography) : A procedure used to x-ray the
			 ducts (tubes) that carry
			 bile from the liver to the
			 gallbladder and from the gallbladder to the small intestine. Sometimes gallbladder cancer
			 causes these ducts to narrow and block or slow the flow of bile, causing
			 jaundice. An endoscope (a thin, lighted tube) is passed through the
			 mouth, esophagus , and stomach into the first part of the small intestine. A catheter (a smaller tube) is then
			 inserted through the endoscope into the bile ducts. A dye is injected
			 through the catheter into the ducts and an x-ray is taken. If the ducts are
			 blocked by a tumor, a fine
			 tube may be inserted into the duct to unblock it. This tube (or stent ) may be left in
			 place to keep the duct open. Tissue samples may also be taken. MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) with gadolinium : A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves , and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. A substance called gadolinium is injected into  a vein. The gadolinium collects around the cancer cells so they show up brighter in the picture. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) : A procedure in which an endoscope  is inserted into the body, usually through the mouth or rectum .  An endoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. A probe at the end of the endoscope is used to bounce high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) off internal tissues or organs and make echoes.  The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram.  This procedure is also called endosonography. Laparoscopy : A surgical procedure to look at the organs inside the abdomen to check for signs of disease.  Small incisions (cuts)  are made in the wall of the abdomen and a laparoscope (a thin, lighted tube) is inserted into one of the incisions. Other instruments may be inserted through the same or other incisions to perform procedures such as removing organs or taking tissue samples for biopsy.  Laparoscopy helps to find out if the
			 cancer is within the gallbladder only or has spread to nearby tissues and if it
			 can be removed by surgery. Biopsy : The removal of cells or tissues so they can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer. The biopsy may be done after surgery to remove the tumor. If the tumor clearly cannot be removed by surgery, the biopsy may be done using a fine needle to remove cells from the tumor. Certain factors affect the prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis and treatment options depend on: the stage of the cancer (whether the cancer has spread from the gallbladder to other places in the body) whether the cancer can be completely removed by surgery the type of gallbladder cancer (how the cancer cell looks under a microscope) whether the cancer has just been diagnosed or has recurred (come back) Treatment may also depend on the age and general health of the patient and whether the cancer is causing signs or symptoms. Gallbladder cancer can be cured only if it is found before it
		  has spread, when it can be removed by surgery. If the cancer has spread, palliative treatment can improve the patient's quality of life by controlling the
		  symptoms and complications of this disease. Stages of Gallbladder Cancer Key Points Tests and procedures to stage gallbladder cancer are usually
		  done at the same time as diagnosis. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. The following stages are used for gallbladder cancer: Stage 0 (Carcinoma in Situ) Stage I Stage II Stage III Stage IV For gallbladder cancer, stages are also grouped according to how the cancer may be treated. There are    two treatment groups: Localized (Stage I) Unresectable, recurrent, or metastatic (Stage II, Stage III, and Stage IV) Tests and procedures to stage gallbladder cancer are usually
		  done at the same time as diagnosis. See the General Information section for a description of tests and procedures used to detect, diagnose , and stage gallbladder cancer. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue , the lymph system , and the blood : Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis . Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor ) and travel through the lymph system or blood. Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor ( metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if  gallbladder cancer spreads to the liver , the cancer cells in the liver are actually gallbladder cancer cells. The disease is metastatic gallbladder cancer, not liver cancer. Many cancer deaths are caused when cancer moves from the original tumor and spreads to other tissues and organs. This is called metastatic cancer. This animation shows how cancer cells travel from the place in the body where they first formed to other parts of the body. The following stages are used for gallbladder cancer: Stage 0 (Carcinoma in Situ) In stage 0 , abnormal cells are found in the mucosa (innermost layer) of the gallbladder wall. These abnormal cells may become cancer and spread into nearby normal tissue. Stage 0 is also called carcinoma in situ . Stage I In stage I , cancer has formed in the mucosa (innermost layer) of the gallbladder wall and may have spread to the muscle layer of the gallbladder wall. Stage II Stage II is divided into stages IIA and IIB, depending on where the cancer has spread in the gallbladder . In stage IIA, cancer has spread through the muscle layer to the connective tissue layer of the gallbladder wall on the side of the gallbladder that is not near the liver . In stage IIB, cancer has spread through the muscle layer to the connective tissue layer of the gallbladder wall on the same side as the liver. Cancer has not spread to the liver. Stage III Stage III is divided into stages IIIA and IIIB, depending on where the cancer has spread. In stage IIIA, cancer has spread through the connective tissue layer of the gallbladder wall and one or more of the following is true: Cancer has spread to the serosa (layer of tissue that covers the gallbladder). Cancer has spread to the liver . Cancer has spread to one nearby organ or structure (such as the stomach , small intestine , colon , pancreas , or the bile ducts outside the liver). In stage IIIB, cancer has formed in the mucosa (innermost layer) of the gallbladder wall and may have spread to the muscle, connective tissue, or serosa (layer of tissue that covers the gallbladder) and may have also spread to the liver or to one nearby organ or structure (such as the stomach, small intestine, colon, pancreas, or the bile ducts outside the liver). Cancer has spread to one to three nearby lymph nodes . Stage IV Stage IV is divided into stages IVA and IVB. In stage IVA, cancer has spread to the portal vein or hepatic artery or to two or more organs or structures other than the liver . Cancer may have spread to one to three nearby lymph nodes . In stage IVB, cancer may have spread to nearby organs or structures. Cancer has spread: to four or more nearby lymph nodes; or to other parts of the body, such as the peritoneum and liver. For gallbladder cancer, stages are also grouped according to how the cancer may be treated. There are    two treatment groups: Localized (Stage I) Cancer is found in the wall of the  gallbladder and  can be completely removed by surgery. Unresectable, recurrent, or metastatic (Stage II, Stage III, and Stage IV) Unresectable cancer cannot be removed completely by surgery. Most patients with gallbladder cancer have unresectable cancer. Recurrent cancer is cancer that has recurred (come back) after it has been treated. Gallbladder cancer may come back  in the gallbladder  or in  other parts of   the body. Metastasis is the spread of cancer from the primary site (place where it started) to other places in the body. Metastatic gallbladder cancer may spread  to  surrounding  tissues, organs,  throughout the abdominal cavity , or to distant parts of the body. Treatment Option Overview Key Points There are different types of treatment for  patients with gallbladder cancer. The following types of treatment are used: Surgery Radiation therapy Chemotherapy New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Radiation  sensitizers Targeted therapy Immunotherapy Treatment for gallbladder cancer may cause side effects. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for  patients with gallbladder cancer. Different types of treatments are available for  patients with gallbladder cancer. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials . A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the  standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. The following types of treatment are used: Surgery Gallbladder cancer may be treated with a  cholecystectomy, surgery to remove the gallbladder and some of the tissues around it. Nearby lymph nodes may be removed. A laparoscope is sometimes used to guide gallbladder surgery. The laparoscope is attached to a video camera and inserted through an incision (port) in the abdomen .  Surgical instruments are inserted through  other ports to perform the surgery. Because there is a risk that gallbladder cancer cells may spread to  these ports,    tissue surrounding the port sites may also be removed. If the cancer has spread and cannot be removed, the following types of palliative surgery may relieve symptoms : Biliary bypass : If the tumor is blocking the bile duct and bile is building up in the
				gallbladder, a biliary bypass may be done. During this operation,  the doctor will cut the gallbladder or bile duct  in the area before the blockage and sew it  to the small intestine to
				create a new pathway around the blocked area. Endoscopic stent placement: If the  tumor is blocking the
				bile duct, surgery may be done to put in a stent (a thin tube) to drain bile
				that has built up in the area. The  doctor may place the stent through a catheter that drains the bile into a bag on the outside
				of the body or the stent may go around the blocked area and drain the bile into
				the small intestine. Percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage : A procedure done to drain bile when there is a blockage and endoscopic stent placement is not possible.  An x-ray of the liver and bile ducts is done to locate the blockage. Images made by ultrasound are used to guide placement of a stent, which is left in the liver to drain bile into the small intestine or a collection bag outside the body. This procedure may be done to relieve jaundice before surgery. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward area of the body with cancer. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping the cells from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic therapy). New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website . Radiation  sensitizers Clinical trials are studying ways to improve the effect of
			 radiation therapy on tumor cells, including the following: Hyperthermia therapy : A treatment in which body tissue is exposed
				to high temperatures to damage and kill cancer cells or to make cancer cells
				more sensitive to the effects of radiation therapy  and certain anticancer drugs. Radiosensitizers : Drugs that make tumor cells more
				sensitive to radiation therapy. Giving radiation therapy together with radiosensitizers may kill more
				tumor cells. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances to identify and attack specific  cancer cells. The following targeted therapies are  being studied in patients with gallbladder cancer that is locally advanced and cannot be removed by surgery or has spread to other parts of the body: Ivosidenib is a type of targeted therapy that blocks a specific mutation in  a gene called IDH1 . It works by slowing or stopping the growth of cancer cells. Pemigatinib is a type of targeted therapy that  blocks specific changes in a gene called FGFR2 . This may help keep cancer cells from growing and may kill them. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy is a treatment that uses the patient's immune system to fight cancer.  Substances made by the body or made in a laboratory are used to boost, direct, or restore the body's natural defenses against cancer. Immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy is a type of immunotherapy that may be used to treat gallbladder cancer. PD-1 and PD-L1 inhibitor therapy: PD-1 is a protein on the surface of T cells that helps keep the body's immune responses in check. PD-L1 is a protein found on some types of cancer cells. When PD-1 attaches to PD-L1, it stops the T cell from killing the cancer cell. PD-1 and PD-L1 inhibitors keep PD-1 and PD-L1 proteins from attaching to each other. This allows the T cells to kill cancer cells. Pembrolizumab is a type of PD-1 inhibitor that may be used  in patients whose cancer  is  locally advanced and cannot be removed by surgery or has spread to other parts of the body. Durvalumab is a type of PD-L1 inhibitor that is being studied in combination with chemotherapy  in  previously untreated patients whose cancer is locally advanced, recurrent , or has spread to other parts of the body. Enlarge Immune checkpoint inhibitor. Checkpoint proteins, such as PD-L1 on tumor cells and PD-1 on T cells, help keep immune responses in check. The binding of PD-L1 to PD-1 keeps T cells from killing tumor cells in the body (left panel). Blocking the binding of PD-L1 to PD-1 with an immune checkpoint inhibitor (anti-PD-L1 or anti-PD-1) allows the T cells to kill tumor cells (right panel). Immunotherapy uses the body’s immune system to fight cancer. This animation explains one type of immunotherapy that uses immune checkpoint inhibitors to treat cancer. Treatment for gallbladder cancer may cause side effects. For information about side effects caused by treatment for cancer, visit our Side Effects page. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer  treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment . Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first  to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. Information about clinical trials supported by NCI can be found on NCI’s clinical trials search webpage. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. Follow-up tests may be needed. As you go through treatment, you  will have follow-up tests or check-ups. Some tests that were done to diagnose or stage the cancer may be repeated to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). Treatment of Localized  and Locally Advanced Gallbladder Cancer For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of localized and locally advanced gallbladder cancer may include: Surgery to remove the gallbladder and some of the tissue around it. 
Part of the liver and nearby lymph nodes may also be removed. Radiation therapy with or without chemotherapy may follow surgery. Radiation therapy with or without   chemotherapy. A clinical trial of radiation therapy with radiosensitizers . Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information about clinical trials is also available. Treatment of Unresectable, Metastatic, or Recurrent Gallbladder Cancer For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of unresectable , metastatic , or recurrent gallbladder cancer is usually within a clinical trial . Treatment may include: Percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage or the placement of stents to relieve symptoms caused by  blocked bile ducts .  This may be followed by radiation therapy as palliative treatment . Surgery as palliative treatment  to relieve symptoms caused by blocked bile ducts. Chemotherapy . A clinical trial of new ways to give palliative radiation therapy, such as giving it together with hyperthermia therapy , radiosensitizers , or chemotherapy. A clinical trial of targeted therapy or immunotherapy for patients with mutations (changes) in certain genes . Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information about clinical trials is also available. To Learn More About Gallbladder Cancer For more information from the National Cancer Institute about  gallbladder cancer, see the Gallbladder Cancer Home Page . For general cancer information and other resources from the National Cancer Institute, visit: About Cancer Cancer Staging Chemotherapy and You: Support for People With Cancer Radiation Therapy and You: Support for People With Cancer Coping with Cancer Questions to Ask Your Doctor about Cancer For Survivors, Caregivers, and Advocates About This PDQ Summary About PDQ Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish . PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. Purpose of This Summary This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about the treatment of gallbladder cancer.  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Reviewers and Updates Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board . Clinical Trial Information A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website . For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). Permission to Use This Summary PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Adult Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Gallbladder Cancer Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/gallbladder/patient/gallbladder-treatment-pdq .  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389400] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online . Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. Disclaimer The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. Contact Us More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us . Updated: January 18, 2024 If you would like to reproduce some or all of this content, see Reuse of NCI Information for guidance about copyright and permissions. In the case of permitted digital reproduction, please credit the National Cancer Institute as the source and link to the original NCI product using the original product's title; e.g., “Gallbladder Cancer Treatment (PDQ®)–Patient Version was originally published by the National Cancer Institute.” Want to use this content on your website or other digital platform? Our syndication services page shows you how. Print Email Back To Top About About This Website en Español Reuse & Copyright Social Media Resources Contact Us Publications Dictionary of Cancer Terms Find a Clinical Trial Policies Accessibility FOIA Privacy & Security Disclaimers Vulnerability Disclosure Sign up for email updates Enter your email address Sign up National Cancer Institute at the National Institutes of Health Contact Us Live Chat 1-800-4-CANCER NCIinfo@nih.gov Site Feedback Follow us Facebook Follow on X Instagram Youtube Linkedin U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health National Cancer Institute USA.gov