Merkel Cell Carcinoma Treatment - NCI Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Español Menu Search Search About Cancer Cancer Types Research Grants & Training News & Events About NCI Home Cancer Types Skin Cancer Patient Merkel Cell Carcinoma Treatment (PDQ®)–Patient Version Print Email Skin Cancer Patient Skin Cancer Treatment Childhood Basal & Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Skin Treatment Melanoma Treatment Childhood Melanoma Treatment Merkel Cell Carcinoma Treatment Skin Cancer Prevention Skin Cancer Screening Health Professional Research Advances Merkel Cell Carcinoma Treatment (PDQ®)–Patient Version On This Page General Information About Merkel Cell Carcinoma Stages of Merkel Cell Carcinoma Treatment Option Overview Treatment of Stage I and Stage II Merkel Cell Carcinoma Treatment of Stage III Merkel Cell Carcinoma Treatment of Stage IV Merkel Cell Carcinoma Treatment of Recurrent Merkel Cell Carcinoma To Learn More About Merkel Cell Carcinoma About This PDQ Summary General Information About Merkel Cell Carcinoma Go to Health Professional Version Key Points Merkel cell carcinoma  is a very rare disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the skin. Sun exposure and having a weak immune system can affect the risk of Merkel cell carcinoma. Merkel cell carcinoma usually appears as a single painless lump on sun-exposed skin. Tests and procedures that examine the skin  are used to diagnose Merkel cell carcinoma. Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Merkel cell carcinoma  is a very rare disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the skin. Merkel cells are  found in the top layer of the skin. These cells are very close to the nerve endings that receive the sensation of touch. Merkel cell carcinoma , also called neuroendocrine carcinoma of the skin or trabecular cancer, is a very rare type  of skin cancer that  forms when Merkel cells grow out of control. Merkel cell carcinoma starts most often in areas of skin exposed to the sun, especially the head and neck, as well as the arms, legs, and trunk . Enlarge Anatomy of the skin showing the epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous tissue. Merkel cells are in the layer of basal cells at the deepest part of the epidermis and are connected to nerves. Merkel cell carcinoma tends to grow quickly and to metastasize (spread) at an early stage . It   usually spreads first to nearby lymph nodes and then may spread to lymph nodes or skin in distant parts of the body, lungs , brain , bones, or other organs . Merkel cell carcinoma is the second most common cause of skin cancer death after melanoma . Sun exposure and having a weak immune system can affect the risk of Merkel cell carcinoma. Anything that increases your risk of getting a disease is called 
         a risk factor .  Having a risk factor does not mean that you will 
         get cancer ; not having risk factors doesn't mean that you will 
         not get cancer. Talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk. Risk factors for Merkel cell carcinoma include the following: Being exposed to a lot of natural sunlight. Being exposed to artificial sunlight, such as from tanning beds or psoralen and ultraviolet A (PUVA) therapy for psoriasis . Having an immune system weakened by disease, such as chronic lymphocytic leukemia or HIV infection . Taking drugs that  make the immune system less active,  such as after an organ transplant . Having a history of other types of cancer. Being older than 50 years, male, or White. Merkel cell carcinoma usually appears as a single painless lump on sun-exposed skin. This and other changes in the skin may be caused by Merkel cell carcinoma or by other conditions . Check with your doctor if you see changes in your skin. Merkel cell carcinoma usually appears  on sun-exposed skin as a single lump that  is: Fast-growing. Painless. Firm and dome-shaped or raised. Red or violet in color. Tests and procedures that examine the skin  are used to diagnose Merkel cell carcinoma. The following tests and procedures may be used: Physical exam and health history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patient’s health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. Full-body skin exam : A doctor or nurse checks the skin for bumps or spots that look abnormal in color, size, shape, or texture. The size, shape, and texture of the lymph nodes will also be checked. Skin biopsy : The removal of skin cells or tissues so they can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer. Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis and treatment options depend on the following: The stage of the cancer (the size of the tumor and whether it has spread to the lymph nodes or other parts of the body). Where the cancer is in the body. Whether the cancer has just been diagnosed or has recurred (come back). The patient's age and general health. Prognosis also depends on  how deeply  the tumor has grown into the skin. Stages of Merkel Cell Carcinoma Key Points After Merkel cell carcinoma has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread  to other parts of the body. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. The following stages are used for Merkel cell carcinoma: Stage 0 (carcinoma in situ) Stage I Stage II Stage III Stage IV Merkel cell carcinoma can recur (come back) after it has been treated. After Merkel cell carcinoma has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread  to other parts of the body. The process used to find out if cancer has spread  to other parts of the body is called staging . The information gathered from the staging process determines the stage of the disease. It is important to know the stage in order to plan treatment. The following tests and procedures may be used in the staging process: CT scan (CAT scan) : A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly.  A CT scan of the chest and abdomen may be used to check for primary small cell lung cancer , or to find Merkel cell carcinoma that has spread. A CT scan of the head and neck may also be used to find Merkel cell carcinoma that has spread to the lymph nodes . This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. PET scan (positron emission tomography scan) : A procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the body.  A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein.  The PET scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body.  Malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do. Lymph node biopsy : There are several types of lymph node biopsy used to stage Merkel cell carcinoma. Sentinel lymph node biopsy :  The removal of the sentinel lymph node during surgery . The sentinel lymph node is the first lymph node in a group of lymph nodes to receive lymphatic drainage from the primary tumor . It is the first lymph node the cancer is likely to spread to from the primary tumor.  A radioactive substance and/or blue dye is injected near the tumor.  The substance or dye flows through the lymph ducts to the lymph nodes.  The first lymph node to receive the substance or dye is removed.   A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells.  If cancer cells are not found, it may not be necessary to remove more lymph nodes. Sometimes, a sentinel lymph node is found in more than one group of nodes. Enlarge Sentinel lymph node biopsy of the skin. A radioactive substance and/or blue dye is injected near the tumor (first panel). The injected material is detected visually and/or with a probe that detects radioactivity (middle panel). The sentinel nodes (the first lymph nodes to take up the material) are removed and checked for cancer cells (last panel). Lymph node dissection : A surgical procedure in which the lymph nodes are removed and a sample of tissue is checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. For a regional lymph node dissection , some of the lymph nodes in the tumor area are removed. For a radical lymph node dissection , most or all of the lymph nodes in the tumor area are removed. This procedure is also called lymphadenectomy. Core needle biopsy : A procedure to remove a sample of tissue using a wide needle.  A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy : A procedure to remove a sample of tissue using a thin needle. A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells. Immunohistochemistry :  A laboratory test that uses antibodies to check for certain antigens ( markers ) in a sample of a patient’s tissue. The antibodies are usually linked to an enzyme or a fluorescent dye. After the antibodies bind to a specific antigen in the tissue sample, the enzyme or dye is activated, and the antigen can then be seen under a microscope. This type of test is used to help diagnose cancer and to help tell one type of cancer from another type of cancer. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue , the lymph system , and the blood : Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis . Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor ) and travel through the lymph system or blood. Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor ( metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if  Merkel cell carcinoma spreads to the liver , the cancer cells in the liver are actually cancerous Merkel cells. The disease is metastatic Merkel cell carcinoma, not liver cancer. Many cancer deaths are caused when cancer moves from the original tumor and spreads to other tissues and organs. This is called metastatic cancer. This animation shows how cancer cells travel from the place in the body where they first formed to other parts of the body. The following stages are used for Merkel cell carcinoma: Enlarge Tumor sizes are often measured in centimeters (cm) or inches. Common food items that can be used to show tumor size in cm include: a pea (1 cm), a peanut (2 cm), a grape (3 cm), a walnut (4 cm), a lime (5 cm or 2 inches), an egg (6 cm), a peach (7 cm), and a grapefruit (10 cm or 4 inches). Stage 0 (carcinoma in situ) In stage 0 , abnormal Merkel cells are found in the top layer of skin. These abnormal cells may become cancer and spread into nearby normal tissue . Stage I In stage I , the tumor is 2 centimeters or smaller. Stage II Stage II Merkel cell carcinoma is divided into stages IIA and IIB. In stage IIA, the tumor is larger than 2 centimeters . In stage IIB, the tumor has spread to nearby connective tissue , muscle, cartilage , or bone. Stage III Stage III Merkel cell carcinoma is divided into stages IIIA and IIIB. In stage IIIA, either of the following is found: the tumor may be any size and may have spread to nearby connective tissue , muscle, cartilage , or bone. A lymph node cannot be felt during a physical exam but cancer is found in the lymph node by sentinel lymph node biopsy or after the lymph node is removed and checked under a microscope for signs of cancer; or a swollen lymph node is felt during a physical exam and/or seen on an imaging test . When the lymph node is removed and checked under a microscope for signs of cancer, cancer is found in the lymph node. The place where the cancer began is not known. In stage IIIB, the tumor may be any size and: may have spread to nearby connective tissue, muscle, cartilage, or bone. A swollen lymph node is felt during a physical exam and/or seen on an imaging test. When the lymph node is removed and checked under a microscope for signs of cancer, cancer is found in the lymph node; or cancer is in a lymph vessel between the primary tumor and lymph nodes that are near or far away. Cancer may have spread to lymph nodes. Stage IV In stage IV , the tumor has spread to skin  that is not close to the primary tumor or to other parts of the body, such as the liver , lung , bone, or brain . Merkel cell carcinoma can recur (come back) after it has been treated. The cancer may come back in the skin, lymph nodes , or other parts of the body. It is common for Merkel cell carcinoma to recur . Treatment Option Overview Key Points There are different types of treatment for patients with Merkel cell carcinoma. Four types of standard treatment are used: Surgery Radiation therapy Chemotherapy Immunotherapy New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Treatment for Merkel cell carcinoma may cause side effects. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with Merkel cell carcinoma. Different types of treatments are available for patients with Merkel cell carcinoma . Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials .  A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer . When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the  standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Four types of standard treatment are used: Surgery One or more of the following surgical procedures may be used to treat Merkel cell carcinoma: Wide local excision : The cancer is cut from the skin along with  some of the tissue around it. A sentinel lymph node biopsy may be done during the wide local excision procedure. If there is cancer in the lymph nodes , a lymph node dissection also may be done. Lymph node dissection: A surgical procedure in which the lymph nodes are removed and  a sample of tissue is checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. For a regional lymph node dissection , some of the lymph nodes in the tumor area are removed; for a radical lymph node dissection , most or all of the lymph nodes in the tumor area are removed. This procedure is also called lymphadenectomy. After the doctor removes all the cancer that can be seen at the time of the surgery, some patients may be given chemotherapy or radiation therapy after surgery to kill any cancer cells that are left. Treatment given after the surgery, to lower the risk that the cancer will come back, is called adjuvant therapy . Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the area of the body with cancer. It is used to treat Merkel cell carcinoma, and may also be used as palliative therapy to relieve symptoms and improve quality of life . Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping the cells from dividing.   When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body ( systemic chemotherapy ). Immunotherapy Immunotherapy is a treatment that uses the patient’s immune system to fight cancer.  Substances made by the body or made in a laboratory are used to boost, direct, or restore the body’s natural defenses against cancer.  This cancer treatment is a type of biologic therapy . Some types of immune cells, such as T cells , and some cancer cells have certain proteins , called checkpoint proteins, on their surface that keep immune responses in check. When cancer cells have large amounts of these proteins, they will not be attacked and killed by T cells. Immune checkpoint inhibitors block these proteins and the ability of T cells to kill cancer cells is increased. There are two types of immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy: PD-1 and PD-L1 inhibitor therapy: PD-1 is a protein on the surface of T cells that helps keep the body's immune responses in check. PD-L1 is a protein found on some types of cancer cells. When PD-1 attaches to PD-L1, it stops the T cell from killing the cancer cell. PD-1 and PD-L1 inhibitors keep PD-1 and PD-L1 proteins from attaching to each other. This allows the T cells to kill cancer cells. Pembrolizumab (a type of PD-1 inhibitor) and avelumab (a type of PD-L1 inhibitor) are used to treat advanced Merkel cell carcinoma. Nivolumab is a type of PD-1 inhibitor being studied to treat advanced Merkel cell carcinoma. Enlarge Immune checkpoint inhibitor. Checkpoint proteins, such as PD-L1 on tumor cells and PD-1 on T cells, help keep immune responses in check. The binding of PD-L1 to PD-1 keeps T cells from killing tumor cells in the body (left panel). Blocking the binding of PD-L1 to PD-1 with an immune checkpoint inhibitor (anti-PD-L1 or anti-PD-1) allows the T cells to kill tumor cells (right panel). Immunotherapy uses the body’s immune system to fight cancer. This animation explains one type of immunotherapy that uses immune checkpoint inhibitors to treat cancer. CTLA-4 inhibitor therapy: CTLA-4 is a protein on the surface of T cells that helps keep the body’s immune responses in check. When CTLA-4 attaches to another protein called B7 on a cancer cell, it stops the T cell from killing the cancer cell. CTLA-4 inhibitors attach to CTLA-4 and allow the T cells to kill cancer cells. Ipilimumab is a type of CTLA-4 inhibitor being studied to treat advanced Merkel cell carcinoma. Enlarge Immune checkpoint inhibitor. Checkpoint proteins, such as B7-1/B7-2 on antigen-presenting cells (APC) and CTLA-4 on T cells, help keep the body’s immune responses in check. When the T-cell receptor (TCR) binds to antigen and major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins on the APC and CD28 binds to B7-1/B7-2 on the APC, the T cell can be activated. However, the binding of B7-1/B7-2 to CTLA-4 keeps the T cells in the inactive state so they are not able to kill tumor cells in the body (left panel). Blocking the binding of B7-1/B7-2 to CTLA-4 with an immune checkpoint inhibitor (anti-CTLA-4 antibody) allows the T cells to be active and to kill tumor cells (right panel). See Drugs Approved for Merkel Cell Carcinoma for more information. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website . Treatment for Merkel cell carcinoma may cause side effects. For information about side effects caused by treatment for cancer, visit our Side Effects page. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer  treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment . Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first  to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. Information about clinical trials supported by NCI can be found on NCI’s clinical trials search webpage. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. Follow-up tests may be needed. As you go through treatment, you  will have follow-up tests or check-ups. Some tests that were done to diagnose or stage the cancer may be repeated to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). Treatment of Stage I and Stage II Merkel Cell Carcinoma For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of stage I and stage II Merkel cell carcinoma may include the following: Surgery to remove the tumor , such as wide local excision with or without lymph node dissection . Radiation therapy after surgery. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information about clinical trials is also available. Treatment of Stage III Merkel Cell Carcinoma For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of stage III Merkel cell carcinoma may include the following: Wide local excision with or without lymph node dissection . Radiation therapy . Immunotherapy ( immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy using pembrolizumab ), for tumors that cannot be removed by surgery . A clinical trial of chemotherapy . A clinical trial of immunotherapy ( nivolumab ). Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information about clinical trials is also available. Treatment of Stage IV Merkel Cell Carcinoma For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of stage IV Merkel cell carcinoma may include the following: Immunotherapy ( immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy using avelumab or pembrolizumab ). Chemotherapy , surgery or radiation therapy as palliative treatment to relieve symptoms and improve quality of life . A clinical trial of immunotherapy ( nivolumab and ipilimumab ). Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information about clinical trials is also available. Treatment of Recurrent Merkel Cell Carcinoma For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of recurrent Merkel cell carcinoma may include the following: Wide local excision to remove a larger area of tissue than was removed in earlier surgery . A lymph node dissection may also be done. Radiation therapy after surgery. Chemotherapy . Radiation therapy and/or surgery as palliative treatment to relieve symptoms and improve quality of life . Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information about clinical trials is also available. To Learn More About Merkel Cell Carcinoma For more information from the National Cancer Institute about Merkel cell  carcinoma ,     see    the following: Skin Cancer (Including Melanoma) Home Page Skin Cancer Prevention Skin Cancer Screening Sentinel Lymph Node Biopsy Immunotherapy to Treat Cancer For general cancer information and other resources from the National Cancer Institute, visit: About Cancer Cancer Staging Chemotherapy and You: Support for People With Cancer Radiation Therapy and You: Support for People With Cancer Coping with Cancer Questions to Ask Your Doctor about Cancer For Survivors, Caregivers, and Advocates About This PDQ Summary About PDQ Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish . PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. Purpose of This Summary This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about the treatment of merkel cell carcinoma.  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Reviewers and Updates Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board . Clinical Trial Information A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website . For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). Permission to Use This Summary PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Adult Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Merkel Cell Carcinoma Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/skin/patient/merkel-cell-treatment-pdq .  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389202] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online . Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. Disclaimer The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. Contact Us More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us . Updated: June 25, 2021 If you would like to reproduce some or all of this content, see Reuse of NCI Information for guidance about copyright and permissions. In the case of permitted digital reproduction, please credit the National Cancer Institute as the source and link to the original NCI product using the original product's title; e.g., “Merkel Cell Carcinoma Treatment (PDQ®)–Patient Version was originally published by the National Cancer Institute.” Want to use this content on your website or other digital platform? Our syndication services page shows you how. Print Email Back To Top About About This Website en Español Reuse & Copyright Social Media Resources Contact Us Publications Dictionary of Cancer Terms Find a Clinical Trial Policies Accessibility FOIA Privacy & Security Disclaimers Vulnerability Disclosure Sign up for email updates Enter your email address Sign up National Cancer Institute at the National Institutes of Health Contact Us Live Chat 1-800-4-CANCER NCIinfo@nih.gov Site Feedback Follow us Facebook Follow on X Instagram Youtube Linkedin U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health National Cancer Institute USA.gov