Treatment of Ovarian Low Malignant PotentialBorderline Tumors - NCI Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Español Menu Search Search About Cancer Cancer Types Research Grants & Training News & Events About NCI Home Cancer Types Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancer Patient Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors Treatment (PDQ®)–Patient Version Print Email Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancer Patient Childhood Ovarian Cancer Treatment Treatment of Ovarian Epithelial, Fallopian Tube, & Primary Peritoneal Cancer Treatment of Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors Treatment of Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors Prevention of Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, & Primary Peritoneal Cancer Screening for Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, & Primary Peritoneal Cancer Health Professional Research Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors Treatment (PDQ®)–Patient Version On This Page General Information About Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors Stages of Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors Treatment Option Overview Treatment of Early Stage Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors (Stage I and II) Treatment of Late Stage Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors (Stage III and IV) Treatment of Recurrent Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors To Learn More About Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors About This PDQ Summary General Information About Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors Go to Health Professional Version Key Points Ovarian low malignant potential tumor is a disease in which   
		   abnormal cells  form in
		  the tissue covering the ovary. Signs and symptoms of ovarian low malignant potential tumor include pain or swelling in the abdomen. Tests that examine the ovaries are used to diagnose and stage ovarian low malignant potential tumor. Certain factors affect prognosis
		  (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Ovarian low malignant potential tumor is a disease in which   
		   abnormal cells  form in
		  the tissue covering the ovary. Ovarian low malignant potential tumors have abnormal cells that may become cancer , but usually do not. This disease usually remains in the ovary . When disease is found in one
		  ovary, the other ovary  should also be checked carefully for signs of
		  disease. The ovaries are a pair of organs in the female reproductive system . They are
		  in the pelvis , one on each
		  side of the uterus (the hollow,
		  pear-shaped organ where a fetus grows). Each ovary is about the size and shape of an almond. The ovaries
		  make eggs and female hormones . Enlarge Anatomy of the female reproductive system. The organs in the female reproductive system include the uterus, ovaries, fallopian tubes, cervix, and vagina. The uterus has a muscular outer layer called the myometrium and an inner lining called the endometrium. Signs and symptoms of ovarian low malignant potential tumor include pain or swelling in the abdomen. Ovarian low malignant potential tumor may not cause early signs or symptoms . If you do have signs or symptoms, they may include the following: Pain or swelling in the abdomen . Pain in the pelvis. Gastrointestinal problems, such as gas, bloating , or constipation . These signs and symptoms may be caused by other conditions . If they get worse or do not go away on their own, check with your doctor. Tests that examine the ovaries are used to diagnose and stage ovarian low malignant potential tumor. The following tests and procedures may be used: Physical exam and health history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patient’s health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. Pelvic exam : An exam of the vagina , cervix , uterus, fallopian tubes , ovaries, and rectum .    A speculum is inserted into the vagina and the doctor or nurse looks at the vagina and cervix for signs of disease.  A Pap test of the cervix is usually done.  The doctor or nurse also inserts one or two lubricated , gloved fingers of one hand into the vagina and places the other hand over the lower abdomen to feel the size, shape, and position of the uterus and ovaries. The doctor or nurse also inserts a lubricated, gloved finger into the rectum to feel for lumps or abnormal areas. Enlarge Pelvic exam. A doctor or nurse inserts one or two lubricated, gloved fingers of one hand into the vagina and presses on the lower abdomen with the other hand. This is done to feel the size, shape, and position of the uterus and ovaries. The vagina, cervix,  fallopian tubes, and rectum are also checked. Ultrasound exam : A procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs and make echoes.  The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram . The picture can be printed to be looked at later. Enlarge Abdominal ultrasound. An ultrasound transducer connected to a computer is passed over the surface of the abdomen. The ultrasound transducer bounces sound waves off internal organs and tissues to make echoes that form a sonogram (computer picture). Other patients may have a transvaginal ultrasound . Enlarge Transvaginal ultrasound. An ultrasound probe connected to a computer is inserted into the vagina and is gently moved to show different organs. The probe bounces sound waves off internal organs and tissues to make echoes that form a sonogram (computer picture). CT scan (CAT scan) : A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles.  The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly.  This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. CA 125 assay : A test that measures the level of CA 125 in the blood . CA 125 is a substance released by cells into the bloodstream. An increased CA 125 level is sometimes a sign of cancer or other condition. Chest x-ray : An x-ray of the organs and bones inside the chest.  An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body. Biopsy : The removal of cells or tissues so they can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer. The tissue is usually removed during surgery to remove the tumor. Certain factors affect prognosis
		  (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis and treatment options depend on the following: The stage of the
		  disease (whether it affects part of the
		  ovary, involves the whole ovary, or has spread to other places in the body). What type of cells make up the tumor . The size of the tumor. The patient’s general health. Patients with ovarian low malignant potential tumors have a good prognosis, especially when the tumor is found early. Stages of Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors Key Points After ovarian low malignant potential tumor has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if abnormal cells have spread within the ovary or to other parts of the body. The following stages are used for ovarian low malignant potential tumor: Stage I Stage II Stage III Stage IV Ovarian low
		malignant potential
		tumors can recur
		(come back) after  they have been treated. After ovarian low malignant potential tumor has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if abnormal cells have spread within the ovary or to other parts of the body. The process used to find out whether abnormal cells have spread within the ovary or to other parts of the body is called staging . The information gathered from the staging process determines the stage of the disease. It is important to know the
		  stage  in order to
		  plan treatment. Certain tests or procedures are used for staging. Staging laparotomy (a surgical incision made in the wall of the abdomen to remove ovarian tissue )
		  may be used. Most patients are diagnosed with stage
		  I disease. The following stages are used for ovarian low malignant potential tumor: Stage I In stage I, the tumor is found in one or both ovaries or fallopian tubes . Stage I is divided into stage IA, stage IB, and stage IC. Stage IA: The tumor is found inside a single ovary or fallopian tube. Stage IB: The tumor is found inside both ovaries or fallopian tubes. Stage IC: The tumor is found inside one or both ovaries or fallopian tubes and one of the following is true: tumor cells are found on the outside surface of one or both ovaries or fallopian tubes; or the capsule (outer covering) of the ovary ruptured (broke open) before or during surgery ; or tumor cells are found in the fluid of the peritoneal cavity (the body cavity that contains most of the organs in the abdomen ) or in washings of the peritoneum ( tissue lining the peritoneal cavity). Stage II In stage II, the tumor is found in one or both ovaries or fallopian tubes and has spread into other areas of the pelvis , or primary peritoneal cancer is found within the pelvis. Stage II is divided into stage IIA and stage IIB. Stage IIA: The tumor has spread from where it first formed to the uterus and/or the fallopian tubes and/or the ovaries. Stage IIB: The tumor has spread from the ovary or fallopian tube to organs in  the peritoneal cavity (the space that contains the abdominal organs). Stage III Enlarge Tumor sizes are often measured in centimeters (cm) or inches. Common food items that can be used to show tumor size in cm include: a pea (1 cm), a peanut (2 cm), a grape (3 cm), a walnut (4 cm), a lime (5 cm or 2 inches), an egg (6 cm), a peach (7 cm), and a grapefruit (10 cm or 4 inches). In stage III, the tumor is found in one or both ovaries or fallopian tubes , or is primary peritoneal cancer , and has spread outside the pelvis to other parts of the abdomen and/or to nearby lymph nodes .
			  Stage III is divided into stage IIIA, stage IIIB, and stage IIIC. In stage IIIA, one of the following is true: The tumor has spread to lymph nodes in the area outside or behind the peritoneum only;      or Tumor cells that can be seen only with a microscope have spread to the surface of the peritoneum outside the pelvis, such as the omentum (a fold of the peritoneum that surrounds the stomach and other organs in the abdomen). The tumor may have spread to nearby lymph nodes. Stage IIIB : The tumor has spread to the peritoneum outside the pelvis, such as the omentum, and the tumor  in the peritoneum is 2 centimeters or smaller. 
The tumor may have spread to lymph nodes behind the peritoneum. Stage IIIC: The tumor has spread to the peritoneum outside the pelvis, such as the omentum, and the tumor in the peritoneum is
				larger than 2 centimeters. The tumor may have spread to lymph nodes behind the peritoneum or to the surface of the liver or spleen . Stage IV In stage IV, tumor cells have spread beyond the abdomen to other parts of the body. Stage IV is divided into stage IVA and stage IVB. Stage IVA: Tumor cells are found in  extra fluid that builds up  around the lungs . Stage IVB: The tumor  has spread to organs and tissues outside the abdomen, including lymph nodes in the groin . Ovarian low
		malignant potential
		tumors can recur
		(come back) after  they have been treated. The tumors may come back in the other ovary or in other parts of the
		body. Treatment Option Overview Key Points There are different types of treatment for patients with ovarian low
		  malignant potential tumor. Two types of standard treatment are used: Surgery Chemotherapy New types of treatment are being tested in clinical
		  trials. Treatment for ovarian low malignant potential tumors may cause side effects. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their treatment. Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with ovarian low
		  malignant potential tumor. Different types of treatment are available for patients with
		  ovarian low
		  malignant potential
		  tumor. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some
		  are being tested in clinical trials .
		   A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help
		  improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients
		  with cancer , tumors , and related conditions . When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the
		  standard treatment, the new
		  treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Two types of standard treatment are used: Surgery The type of surgery (removing the tumor in an operation) depends on
			 the size and spread of the tumor and the woman’s plans for having children. Surgery
			 may include the following: Unilateral
				salpingo-oophorectomy : Surgery to remove one ovary and one fallopian tube . Bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy : Surgery to remove both ovaries and both fallopian tubes. Total hysterectomy and
				bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy: Surgery to remove the uterus , cervix , and both ovaries and fallopian tubes.  If the uterus and cervix are taken out through the vagina , the operation is called a vaginal hysterectomy .  If the uterus and cervix are taken out through a large incision (cut) in the abdomen , the operation is called a total abdominal hysterectomy.  If the uterus and cervix are taken out through a small incision (cut) in the abdomen using a laparoscope , the operation is called a total laparoscopic hysterectomy. Enlarge Hysterectomy. The uterus is surgically removed with or without other organs or tissues. In a total hysterectomy, the uterus and cervix are removed. In a total hysterectomy with salpingo-oophorectomy, (a) the uterus plus one (unilateral) ovary and fallopian tube are removed; or (b) the uterus plus both (bilateral) ovaries and fallopian tubes are removed. In a radical hysterectomy, the uterus, cervix, both ovaries, both fallopian tubes, and nearby tissue are removed. These procedures are done using a low transverse incision or a vertical incision. Partial oophorectomy : Surgery to remove part of one ovary or part of both ovaries. Omentectomy :
				Surgery to remove the omentum (a piece of the tissue lining the abdominal wall). After the doctor removes all disease that can be seen at the
			 time of the surgery, the patient may be given chemotherapy after surgery to kill any tumor cells that are left. Treatment given
			 after the surgery, to lower the risk that the tumor will come back, is called adjuvant therapy . Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing.  When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body ( systemic chemotherapy ).  When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid , an organ , or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas ( regional chemotherapy ). The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical
		  trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website . Treatment for ovarian low malignant potential tumors may cause side effects. For information about side effects caused by treatment for cancer, visit our Side Effects page. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the medical research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for disease are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way diseases will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose disease has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop a disease from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. Information about clinical trials supported by NCI can be found on NCI’s clinical trials search webpage. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the disease may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. This is sometimes called re-staging. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the disease has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Treatment of Early Stage Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors (Stage I and II) For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Surgery is the standard treatment for early stage ovarian low
		  malignant potential
		  tumor . The type of surgery usually depends on
		  whether a woman plans to have children. For women who plan to have children, surgery is either: unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy ; or partial oophorectomy . To prevent recurrence of
		  disease, most doctors recommend surgery to remove the remaining ovarian tissue when a woman no longer plans to have children. For women who do not plan to have children, treatment may
		  be hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy . Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information about clinical trials is also available. Treatment of Late Stage Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors (Stage III and IV) For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment for late stage ovarian low
		  malignant potential
		  tumor may
		  be hysterectomy , bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy , and omentectomy .  A lymph node dissection may also be
			 done. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information about clinical trials is also available. Treatment of Recurrent Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment for recurrent ovarian low
		  malignant potential
		  tumor may include the following: Surgery . Surgery followed by chemotherapy . Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information about clinical trials is also available. To Learn More About Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors For general cancer information and other resources from the National Cancer Institute, visit: About Cancer Cancer Staging Chemotherapy and You: Support for People With Cancer Radiation Therapy and You: Support for People With Cancer Coping with Cancer Questions to Ask Your Doctor about Cancer For Survivors, Caregivers, and Advocates About This PDQ Summary About PDQ Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish . PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. Purpose of This Summary This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about the treatment of ovarian low-malignant potential tumors.  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Reviewers and Updates Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board . Clinical Trial Information A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website . For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). Permission to Use This Summary PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Adult Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/ovarian/patient/ovarian-low-malignant-treatment-pdq .  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389247] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online . Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. Disclaimer The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. Contact Us More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us . Updated: April 22, 2022 If you would like to reproduce some or all of this content, see Reuse of NCI Information for guidance about copyright and permissions. In the case of permitted digital reproduction, please credit the National Cancer Institute as the source and link to the original NCI product using the original product's title; e.g., “Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors Treatment (PDQ®)–Patient Version was originally published by the National Cancer Institute.” Want to use this content on your website or other digital platform? Our syndication services page shows you how. Print Email Back To Top About About This Website en Español Reuse & Copyright Social Media Resources Contact Us Publications Dictionary of Cancer Terms Find a Clinical Trial Policies Accessibility FOIA Privacy & Security Disclaimers Vulnerability Disclosure Sign up for email updates Enter your email address Sign up National Cancer Institute at the National Institutes of Health Contact Us Live Chat 1-800-4-CANCER NCIinfo@nih.gov Site Feedback Follow us Facebook Follow on X Instagram Youtube Linkedin U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health National Cancer Institute USA.gov