Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, & Primary Peritoneal Cancers Prevention - NCI Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Español Menu Search Search About Cancer Cancer Types Research Grants & Training News & Events About NCI Home Cancer Types Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancer Patient Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancers Prevention (PDQ®)–Patient Version Print Email Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancer Patient Childhood Ovarian Cancer Treatment Treatment of Ovarian Epithelial, Fallopian Tube, & Primary Peritoneal Cancer Treatment of Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors Treatment of Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors Prevention of Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, & Primary Peritoneal Cancer Screening for Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, & Primary Peritoneal Cancer Health Professional Research Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancers Prevention (PDQ®)–Patient Version On This Page What Is Prevention? General Information About Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancers Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancers Prevention About This PDQ Summary What Is Prevention? Go to Health Professional Version Cancer prevention is action taken to lower the chance of getting 
         cancer. By preventing cancer, the number of new cases of cancer 
         in a group or population is lowered. Hopefully, this will lower 
         the number of deaths caused by cancer. To prevent new cancers from starting, scientists look at risk 
         factors and protective factors . Anything that increases your 
         chance of developing cancer is called a cancer risk factor; 
         anything that decreases your chance of developing cancer is 
         called a cancer protective factor. Some risk factors for cancer can be avoided, but many cannot. 
         For example, both smoking and inheriting certain genes are 
         risk factors for some types of cancer, but only smoking can be 
         avoided. Regular exercise and a healthy diet may be protective 
         factors for some types of cancer. Avoiding risk factors and 
         increasing protective factors may lower your risk, but it does 
         not mean that you will not get cancer. Different ways to prevent cancer are being studied, including: Changing lifestyle or eating habits. Avoiding things known to cause cancer. Taking medicines to treat a precancerous condition or to 
         keep cancer from starting. General Information About Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancers Key Points Ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers are diseases in which malignant (cancer) cells
		  form in the  ovaries, fallopian tubes, or peritoneum. Ovarian cancer is the leading cause of death from cancer of the
		  female reproductive system. Ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers are diseases in which malignant (cancer) cells
		  form in the  ovaries, fallopian tubes, or peritoneum. The ovaries are a pair
		  of organs in the female reproductive
		  system . They are in the pelvis , one on each side of the uterus (the hollow, pear-shaped
		  organ where a fetus grows). Each
		  ovary is about the size and shape of an almond. The ovaries  make eggs and
		  female hormones ( chemicals that
		  control the way certain cells or
		  organs  work in the body). The fallopian tubes are a pair of long, slender tubes, one on each side of the uterus. Eggs pass from the ovaries, through the fallopian tubes, to the uterus. Cancer sometimes begins at the end of the fallopian tube near the ovary and spreads to the ovary. The peritoneum is the tissue that lines the abdominal wall and covers organs in the abdomen . Primary peritoneal cancer is cancer that forms in the peritoneum and has not spread there from another part of the body. Cancer sometimes begins in the peritoneum and spreads to the ovary. Enlarge Anatomy of the female reproductive system. The organs in the female reproductive system include the uterus, ovaries, fallopian tubes, cervix, and vagina. The uterus has a muscular outer layer called the myometrium and an inner lining called the endometrium. Ovarian cancer is the leading cause of death from cancer of the
		  female reproductive system. Ovarian cancer is most common in postmenopausal women. From 2012 to 2021, the number  of new cases of ovarian cancer decreased slightly each year. There was also a slight decrease in the number  of deaths from ovarian cancer each year from 2013 to 2022. Women who have a family history of ovarian cancer and/or have inherited certain changes in genes , such as the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene, have a higher risk than those who do not have a family history or who have not inherited these gene changes. For  women with inherited risk, genetic counseling and genetic testing can be  used to find out more about their likelihood of developing  ovarian cancer. It is hard to find ovarian cancer early. Early ovarian cancer may not cause any symptoms . When symptoms do appear, ovarian cancer is often advanced . Other PDQ summaries containing information related to ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers include: Genetics of Breast and Gynecologic Cancers (written for health professionals) Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancers Screening Ovarian Epithelial, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancers Treatment Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancers Prevention Key Points Avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors may
		  help prevent cancer. The following are risk factors for ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers: Family history of ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers Inherited risk Hormone replacement therapy Weight and height Endometriosis The following are protective factors  for ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers: Oral contraceptives Tubal ligation Giving birth Salpingectomy Breastfeeding Risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy It is not clear whether the  following  affect the risk of ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers: Diet Alcohol Aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs Talc Infertility treatment Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways 
    to prevent cancer. New ways to prevent ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers are being studied in clinical 
     trials. Avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors may
		  help prevent cancer. Avoiding cancer risk factors may help prevent certain cancers. Risk factors include smoking, having overweight , and not getting enough exercise.  Increasing protective factors such as quitting smoking and exercising may also help prevent some cancers. Talk to your doctor or other health care professional about how you might lower your risk of cancer. The following are risk factors for ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers: Family history of ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers A woman whose mother or sister  had ovarian cancer has an increased risk of ovarian cancer. A woman with two or  more relatives with ovarian cancer also has an increased risk of ovarian cancer. Inherited risk The risk of ovarian cancer is increased in women who have inherited certain changes in genes , such as the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene. The risk of ovarian cancer is also increased in women who have certain inherited syndromes , such as: Familial site-specific ovarian cancer syndrome. Familial breast/ovarian cancer syndrome. Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC; also called Lynch syndrome ). Hormone replacement therapy There is a slightly increased risk of ovarian cancer in women who are taking hormone replacement therapy (HRT) after menopause . There is also an increased risk of ovarian cancer in women who have recently used HRT, even if they used it for less than 5 years. The risk of ovarian cancer is the same for HRT with estrogen only or with combined estrogen and progestin . 
HRT taken through the skin may have a lower risk than HRT taken by mouth. When HRT is stopped, the risk of ovarian cancer decreases over time.
The risk of ovarian cancer is not affected by the age of the woman when taking HRT. Weight and height Having excess body weight or obesity is linked to an increased risk of ovarian cancer. Obesity is also linked to an increased risk of death from ovarian cancer. Being tall may also be linked to a slight increase in the risk of ovarian cancer. Endometriosis Women who have endometriosis have an increased risk of ovarian cancer. The following are protective factors  for ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers: Oral contraceptives Taking oral contraceptives ("the pill") lowers the risk of ovarian
			 cancer. The longer oral contraceptives are used, the lower the risk may
			 be. The decrease in risk may last up to 30 years after a woman has stopped taking oral
			 contraceptives. Taking  oral contraceptives increases the risk of blood clots . This risk is higher in women who also smoke. Tubal ligation The risk of ovarian cancer is decreased in  women who have a tubal ligation ( surgery to close both fallopian tubes ). Giving birth Women who have given birth have a decreased risk of ovarian cancer compared to women who have not given birth. Giving birth to more than one child further decreases the risk of ovarian cancer. Salpingectomy Some studies have shown that salpingectomy (surgery to remove one or both fallopian tubes) is linked to a decreased risk of ovarian cancer.  When both fallopian tubes are removed, the risk of ovarian cancer is lowered more than when one fallopian tube is removed. Breastfeeding Breastfeeding is  linked to a decreased risk of ovarian cancer. The longer a woman breastfeeds, the lower her risk of ovarian cancer. Women who breastfeed for at least 8 to 10 months have the greatest decrease in risk of ovarian cancer. Risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy Some women who have a high risk of ovarian cancer may choose to have a risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy (surgery to remove the fallopian tubes and ovaries when there are no signs of cancer).  This includes women who have inherited certain changes in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene or have an inherited syndrome. It is very important  to have a cancer risk
			 assessment and counseling before making this decision.  These and other factors may be discussed: Infertility . Early menopause : The drop in estrogen levels caused by removing the ovaries can cause early menopause. Symptoms of menopause  can worsen and include: Hot flashes . Night sweats. Trouble sleeping. Mood changes. Decreased sex drive . Heart disease. Vaginal dryness. Frequent urination. Osteoporosis (decreased bone density ). These symptoms may not be the same in all women. Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) may be used to lessen these symptoms. Risk of ovarian cancer in the peritoneum :  Women who have had a  risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy continue to have a small risk of  ovarian cancer in the peritoneum (thin layer of tissue that lines the inside of the abdomen ). This is rare, but may occur if  ovarian cancer cells had already spread to  the peritoneum before the surgery or if some ovarian tissue remains after surgery. It is not clear whether the  following  affect the risk of ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers: Diet Studies of dietary factors have not found a strong link to ovarian cancer. Alcohol Studies have not shown a link between  drinking alcohol and  the risk of  ovarian cancer. Aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs Some studies of aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have found a decreased risk of ovarian cancer and others have not. Talc Studies of women who used talcum powder (talc) dusted on the perineum (the area between the vagina and the anus ) have not found clear evidence of an increased risk of ovarian cancer. Infertility treatment Overall, studies in women using  fertility drugs have not found clear evidence of an increased
				risk of ovarian cancer.  The risk of invasive ovarian cancer may be higher in women who do not get pregnant after taking fertility drugs. Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways 
    to prevent cancer. Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to lower the risk of developing certain types of cancer. Some cancer prevention trials include healthy people who may or may not have an increased risk of cancer. Other prevention trials include people who have had cancer and are trying to prevent recurrence or a second cancer. The purpose of some cancer prevention clinical trials is to find out whether actions people take can prevent cancer. These may include eating fruits and vegetables, exercising, quitting smoking, or taking certain medicines, vitamins , minerals , or food supplements . New ways to prevent ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers are being studied in clinical 
     trials. Information about clinical trials supported by NCI can be found on NCI’s clinical trials search webpage. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. About This PDQ Summary About PDQ Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish . PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. Purpose of This Summary This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers prevention.  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Reviewers and Updates Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Screening and Prevention Editorial Board . Clinical Trial Information A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website . For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). Permission to Use This Summary PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Screening and Prevention Editorial Board. PDQ Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancers Prevention. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/ovarian/patient/ovarian-prevention-pdq .  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389375] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online . Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. Disclaimer The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. Contact Us More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us . Updated: February 12, 2025 If you would like to reproduce some or all of this content, see Reuse of NCI Information for guidance about copyright and permissions. In the case of permitted digital reproduction, please credit the National Cancer Institute as the source and link to the original NCI product using the original product's title; e.g., “Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancers Prevention (PDQ®)–Patient Version was originally published by the National Cancer Institute.” Want to use this content on your website or other digital platform? Our syndication services page shows you how. Print Email Back To Top About About This Website en Español Reuse & Copyright Social Media Resources Contact Us Publications Dictionary of Cancer Terms Find a Clinical Trial Policies Accessibility FOIA Privacy & Security Disclaimers Vulnerability Disclosure Sign up for email updates Enter your email address Sign up National Cancer Institute at the National Institutes of Health Contact Us Live Chat 1-800-4-CANCER NCIinfo@nih.gov Site Feedback Follow us Facebook Follow on X Instagram Youtube Linkedin U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health National Cancer Institute USA.gov