5-alpha reductase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → 5-alpha reductase deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/5-alpha-reductase-deficiency/ 5-alpha reductase deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description 5-alpha reductase deficiency is a condition that affects sexual development before birth and during puberty. People with this condition are genetically male, with one X and one Y chromosome in each cell, and they have male gonads (testes) . Their bodies, however, do not produce enough of a hormone called dihydrotestosterone (DHT). DHT has a critical role in male sexual development, and a shortage of this hormone disrupts the formation of the external sex organs before birth. Many people with 5-alpha reductase deficiency have external genitalia that appears female. In other cases, affected infants have male-typical external genitalia, often an unusually small penis (micropenis) and the urethra opening on the underside of the penis (hypospadias). Still other affected infants have external genitalia do not look clearly male or clearly female. During puberty, an increase in the levels of male sex hormones leads to the development of some secondary sex characteristics, such as increased muscle mass, deepening of the voice, development of pubic hair, and a growth spurt. The penis and scrotum (the sac of skin that holds the testes) may grow larger. People with 5-alpha reductase deficiency do not develop much facial or body hair. Most affected individuals are unable to have biological children (infertile) without assisted reproduction. Frequency 5-alpha reductase deficiency is a rare condition; the exact incidence is unknown.  Large families with affected members have been found in several countries, including the Dominican Republic, Papua New Guinea, Turkey, and Egypt. Causes Variants (also called mutations) in the SRD5A2 gene cause 5-alpha reductase deficiency. The SRD5A2 gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called steroid 5-alpha reductase 2. This enzyme is involved in processing androgens, which are hormones that direct male sexual development. Specifically, the steroid 5-alpha reductase 2 enzyme is responsible for a chemical reaction that converts the hormone testosterone to DHT. DHT is essential for the normal development of male sex characteristics before birth, particularly the formation of the external genitalia. Variants in the SRD5A2 gene prevent steroid 5-alpha reductase 2 from effectively converting testosterone to DHT in the developing reproductive tissues. These hormonal factors underlie the changes in sexual development seen in infants with 5-alpha reductase deficiency. During puberty, the testes produce more testosterone.  Researchers believe that people with 5-alpha reductase deficiency develop secondary male sex characteristics in response to higher levels of this hormone.  Some affected people also retain a small amount of 5-alpha reductase 2 activity, which may produce DHT and contribute to the development of secondary sex characteristics during puberty. Learn more about the gene associated with 5-alpha reductase deficiency SRD5A2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the SRD5A2 gene in each cell must have a variant to cause the disorder. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Although people who are genetically female (with two X chromosomes in each cell) may inherit variants in both copies of the SRD5A2 gene, their sexual development is not affected. The development of female sex characteristics does not require DHT, so a lack of steroid 5-alpha reductase 2 activity does not cause physical changes in these individuals. Only people who have variants in both copies of the SRD5A2 gene and are genetically male (with one X and one Y chromosome in each cell) will have the characteristic signs of 5-alpha reductase deficiency. Other Names for This Condition PPSH Pseudovaginal perineoscrotal hypospadias Steroid 5-alpha-reductase deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: 3-Oxo-5 alpha-steroid delta 4-dehydrogenase deficiency Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center 46,XY disorder of sex development due to 5-alpha-reductase 2 deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PSEUDOVAGINAL PERINEOSCROTAL HYPOSPADIAS; PPSH Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bahceci M, Ersay AR, Tuzcu A, Hiort O, Richter-Unruh A, Gokalp D. A novel
missense mutation of 5-alpha reductase type 2 gene (SRD5A2) leads to severe male
pseudohermaphroditism in a Turkish family. Urology. 2005 Aug;66(2):407-10. doi:
10.1016/j.urology.2005.02.021. Citation on PubMed Baldinotti F, Majore S, Fogli A, Marrocco G, Ghirri P, Vuerich M, Tumini S,
Boscherini B, Vetri M, Scommegna S, Rinaldi R, Simi P, Grammatico P. Molecular
characterization of 6 unrelated Italian patients with 5alpha-reductase type 2
deficiency. J Androl. 2008 Jan-Feb;29(1):20-8. doi: 10.2164/jandrol.107.002592.
Epub 2007 Jul 3. Citation on PubMed Cohen-Kettenis PT. Gender change in 46,XY persons with 5alpha-reductase-2
deficiency and 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-3 deficiency. Arch Sex Behav.
2005 Aug;34(4):399-410. doi: 10.1007/s10508-005-4339-4. Citation on PubMed Hackel C, Oliveira LE, Ferraz LF, Tonini MM, Silva DN, Toralles MB,
Stuchi-Perez EG, Guerra-Junior G. New mutations, hotspots, and founder effects in
Brazilian patients with steroid 5alpha-reductase deficiency type 2. J Mol Med
(Berl). 2005 Jul;83(7):569-76. doi: 10.1007/s00109-005-0651-7. Epub 2005 Mar 16. Citation on PubMed Lee PA, Houk CP, Ahmed SF, Hughes IA; International Consensus Conference on
Intersex organized by the Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine Society and the
European Society for Paediatric Endocrinology. Consensus statement on management
of intersex disorders. International Consensus Conference on Intersex.
Pediatrics. 2006 Aug;118(2):e488-500. doi: 10.1542/peds.2006-0738. No abstract
available. Citation on PubMed Okeigwe I, Kuohung W. 5-Alpha reductase deficiency: a 40-year retrospective
review. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2014 Dec;21(6):483-7. doi:
10.1097/MED.0000000000000116. Citation on PubMed Sultan C, Lumbroso S, Paris F, Jeandel C, Terouanne B, Belon C, Audran F,
Poujol N, Georget V, Gobinet J, Jalaguier S, Auzou G, Nicolas JC. Disorders of
androgen action. Semin Reprod Med. 2002 Aug;20(3):217-28. doi:
10.1055/s-2002-35386. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Endocrine Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Ambiguous genitalia Differences of sex development Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated April 1, 2017