Ichthyosis with confetti: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Ichthyosis with confetti URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/ichthyosis-with-confetti/ Ichthyosis with confetti To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Ichthyosis with confetti is a disorder of the skin. Individuals with this condition are born with red, scaly skin all over the body, which can be itchy in some people. In childhood or adolescence, hundreds to thousands of small patches of normal skin appear, usually on the torso. The numerous pale spots surrounded by red skin look like confetti, giving the condition its name. The patches of normal skin increase in number and size over time. In addition to red, scaly skin, people with ichthyosis with confetti typically have abnormally thick skin on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet (palmoplantar keratoderma). Many affected individuals have excess hair (hirsutism) on some parts of the body, particularly on the arms and legs. Because of their skin abnormalities, people with ichthyosis with confetti are at increased risk of developing skin infections. Frequency Ichthyosis with confetti is a rare disorder. Fewer than 20 affected individuals have been described in the medical literature. Causes Mutations in the KRT10 gene cause ichthyosis with confetti. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called keratin 10, which is found in cells called keratinocytes in the outer layer of the skin (the epidermis). In the fluid-filled space inside these cells (the cytoplasm ), this tough, fibrous protein attaches to another keratin protein (produced from a different gene) to form fibers called intermediate filaments . These filaments assemble into strong networks that provide strength and resiliency to the skin. KRT10 gene mutations associated with ichthyosis with confetti alter the keratin 10 protein. The altered protein is abnormally transported to the nucleus of cells, where it cannot form networks of intermediate filaments. Loss of these networks disrupts the epidermis, contributing to the red, scaly skin. However, in some abnormal cells, the mutated gene corrects itself through a complex process by which genetic material is exchanged between chromosomes. As a result, normal keratin 10 protein is produced and remains in the cytoplasm. The cell becomes normal and, as it continues to grow and divide, forms small patches of normal skin that give ichthyosis with confetti its name. Learn more about the gene associated with Ichthyosis with confetti KRT10 Inheritance Ichthyosis with confetti is considered to have an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Usually, the condition is caused by a new mutation that occurs very early in embryonic development (called a de novo mutation). In these cases, the affected individuals have no history of the disorder in their family. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent . Other Names for This Condition Congenital reticular ichthyosiform erythroderma CRIE Ichthyosis variegata IWC Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Erythrokeratoderma, reticular Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM ICHTHYOSIS WITH CONFETTI; IWC Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Brusasco A, Cambiaghi S, Tadini G, Berti E, Caputo R. Unusual
hyperpigmentation developing in congenital reticular ichthyosiform erythroderma
(ichthyosis variegata). Br J Dermatol. 1998 Nov;139(5):893-6. doi:
10.1046/j.1365-2133.1998.02521.x. Citation on PubMed Burger B, Spoerri I, Schubert M, Has C, Itin PH. Description of the natural
course and clinical manifestations of ichthyosis with confetti caused by a novel
KRT10 mutation. Br J Dermatol. 2012 Feb;166(2):434-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2133.2011.10639.x. Epub 2011 Dec 5. Citation on PubMed Choate KA, Lu Y, Zhou J, Choi M, Elias PM, Farhi A, Nelson-Williams C,
Crumrine D, Williams ML, Nopper AJ, Bree A, Milstone LM, Lifton RP. Mitotic
recombination in patients with ichthyosis causes reversion of dominant mutations
in KRT10. Science. 2010 Oct 1;330(6000):94-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1192280. Epub
2010 Aug 26. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Krunic AL, Palcesky D, Busbey S, Medenica M. Congenital reticular
ichthyosiform erythroderma--ichthyosis variegata: a case report and review of the
literature. Acta Derm Venereol. 2003;83(1):36-9. doi: 10.1080/00015550310002684. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Skin Conditions MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2014