Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/juvenile-myoclonic-epilepsy/ Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy is a condition characterized by recurrent seizures (epilepsy). This condition begins in childhood or adolescence, usually between ages 12 and 18, and lasts into adulthood. The most common type of seizure in people with this condition is myoclonic seizures, which cause rapid, uncontrolled muscle jerks. People with this condition may also have generalized tonic-clonic seizures (also known as grand mal seizures), which cause muscle rigidity, convulsions, and loss of consciousness. Sometimes, affected individuals have absence seizures, which cause loss of consciousness for a short period that appears as a staring spell. Typically, people with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy develop the characteristic myoclonic seizures in adolescence, then develop generalized tonic-clonic seizures a few years later. Although seizures can happen at any time, they occur most commonly in the morning, shortly after awakening. Seizures can be triggered by a lack of sleep, extreme tiredness, stress, or alcohol consumption. Frequency Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy affects an estimated 1 in 1,000 people worldwide. Approximately 5 percent of people with epilepsy have juvenile myoclonic epilepsy. Causes The genetics of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy are complex and not completely understood. Mutations in one of several genes can cause or increase susceptibility to this condition. The most studied of these genes are the GABRA1 gene and the EFHC1 gene, although mutations in at least three other genes have been identified in people with this condition. Many people with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy do not have mutations in any of these genes. Changes in other, unidentified genes are likely involved in this condition. A mutation in the GABRA1 gene has been identified in several members of a large family with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy. The GABRA1 gene provides instructions for making one piece, the alpha-1 (α1) subunit, of the GABA A receptor protein. The GABA A receptor acts as a channel that allows negatively charged chlorine atoms (chloride ions) to cross the cell membrane. After infancy, the influx of chloride ions creates an environment in the cell that inhibits signaling between nerve cells (neurons) and prevents the brain from being overloaded with too many signals. Mutations in the GABRA1 gene lead to an altered α1 subunit and a decrease in the number of GABA A receptors available. As a result, the signaling between neurons is not controlled, which can lead to overstimulation of neurons. Researchers believe that the overstimulation of certain neurons in the brain triggers the abnormal brain activity associated with seizures. Mutations in the EFHC1 gene have been associated with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy in a small number of people. The EFHC1 gene provides instructions for making a protein that also plays a role in neuron activity, although its function is not completely understood. The EFHC1 protein is attached to another protein that acts as a calcium channel. This protein allows positively charged calcium ions to cross the cell membrane. The movement of these ions is critical for normal signaling between neurons. The EFHC1 protein is thought to help regulate the balance of calcium ions inside the cell, although the mechanism is unclear. In addition, studies show that the EFHC1 protein may be involved in the self-destruction of cells. EFHC1 gene mutations reduce the function of the EFHC1 protein. Researchers suggest that this reduction causes an increase in the number of neurons and disrupts the calcium balance. Together, these effects may lead to overstimulation of neurons and trigger seizures. Learn more about the genes associated with Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy CLCN2 EFHC1 GABRA1 Additional Information from NCBI Gene: CACNB4 GABRD Inheritance The inheritance pattern of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy is not completely understood. When the condition is caused by mutations in the GABRA1 gene, it is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. The inheritance pattern of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy caused by mutations in the EFHC1 gene is not known. Although juvenile myoclonic epilepsy can run in families, many cases occur in people with no family history of the disorder. Other Names for This Condition Adolescent myoclonic epilepsy Janz syndrome Petit mal, impulsive Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Epilepsy, idiopathic generalized, susceptibility to, 10 Genetic Testing Registry: Epilepsy, idiopathic generalized, susceptibility to, 11 Genetic Testing Registry: Epilepsy, idiopathic generalized, susceptibility to, 13 Genetic Testing Registry: Epilepsy, idiopathic generalized, susceptibility to, 9 Genetic Testing Registry: Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM EPILEPSY, MYOCLONIC JUVENILE; EJM EPILEPSY, IDIOPATHIC GENERALIZED, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 11; EIG11 EPILEPSY, IDIOPATHIC GENERALIZED, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 9; EIG9 EPILEPSY, IDIOPATHIC GENERALIZED, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 13; EIG13 EPILEPSY, JUVENILE MYOCLONIC, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 9; EJM9 EPILEPSY, IDIOPATHIC GENERALIZED, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 10; EIG10 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Cossette P, Liu L, Brisebois K, Dong H, Lortie A, Vanasse M, Saint-Hilaire JM,
Carmant L, Verner A, Lu WY, Wang YT, Rouleau GA. Mutation of GABRA1 in an
autosomal dominant form of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy. Nat Genet. 2002
Jun;31(2):184-9. doi: 10.1038/ng885. Epub 2002 May 6. Citation on PubMed Ding L, Feng HJ, Macdonald RL, Botzolakis EJ, Hu N, Gallagher MJ. GABA(A)
receptor alpha1 subunit mutation A322D associated with autosomal dominant
juvenile myoclonic epilepsy reduces the expression and alters the composition of
wild type GABA(A) receptors. J Biol Chem. 2010 Aug 20;285(34):26390-405. doi:
10.1074/jbc.M110.142299. Epub 2010 Jun 15. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Gallagher MJ, Ding L, Maheshwari A, Macdonald RL. The GABAA receptor alpha1
subunit epilepsy mutation A322D inhibits transmembrane helix formation and causes
proteasomal degradation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Aug 7;104(32):12999-3004.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0700163104. Epub 2007 Aug 1. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Krampfl K, Maljevic S, Cossette P, Ziegler E, Rouleau GA, Lerche H, Bufler J.
Molecular analysis of the A322D mutation in the GABA receptor alpha-subunit
causing juvenile myoclonic epilepsy. Eur J Neurosci. 2005 Jul;22(1):10-20. doi:
10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.04168.x. Citation on PubMed Suzuki T, Delgado-Escueta AV, Aguan K, Alonso ME, Shi J, Hara Y, Nishida M,
Numata T, Medina MT, Takeuchi T, Morita R, Bai D, Ganesh S, Sugimoto Y, Inazawa
J, Bailey JN, Ochoa A, Jara-Prado A, Rasmussen A, Ramos-Peek J, Cordova S,
Rubio-Donnadieu F, Inoue Y, Osawa M, Kaneko S, Oguni H, Mori Y, Yamakawa K.
Mutations in EFHC1 cause juvenile myoclonic epilepsy. Nat Genet. 2004
Aug;36(8):842-9. doi: 10.1038/ng1393. Epub 2004 Jul 18. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Epilepsy Genetic Disorders Seizures MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Absence seizure Bilateral tonic-clonic seizure Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated September 1, 2015