Acromicric dysplasia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Acromicric dysplasia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/acromicric-dysplasia/ Acromicric dysplasia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Acromicric dysplasia is a condition characterized by severely short stature, short limbs, stiff joints, and distinctive facial features. Newborns with acromicric dysplasia are of normal size, but slow growth over time results in short stature. The average height of adults with this disorder is about 4 feet, 2 inches for women and 4 feet, 5 inches for men. The long bones of the arms and legs, and the bones in the hands and feet, are shorter than would be expected for the individual's height. Other skeletal features that occur in this disorder include slowed mineralization of bone (delayed bone age), abnormally shaped bones of the spine ( vertebrae ), and constrained movement of joints. Affected individuals often develop carpal tunnel syndrome , which is characterized by numbness, tingling, and weakness in the hands and fingers. A misalignment of the hip joints (hip dysplasia) can also occur in this disorder. These skeletal and joint problems may require treatment, but most affected individuals have few limitations in their activities. Children with acromicric dysplasia may have a round face,  sharply defined eyebrows, long eyelashes , a bulbous nose with upturned nostrils, a long space between the nose and upper lip ( long philtrum ), and a small mouth with thick lips. These facial differences become less apparent in adulthood. Intelligence is unaffected in this disorder, and life expectancy is generally normal. Frequency Acromicric dysplasia is a rare disorder; its prevalence is unknown. Causes Acromicric dysplasia is caused by mutations in the FBN1 gene, which provides instructions for making a large protein called fibrillin-1. This protein is transported out of cells into the extracellular matrix, which is an intricate lattice of proteins and other molecules that forms in the spaces between cells. In this matrix, molecules of fibrillin-1 attach (bind) to each other and to other proteins to form threadlike filaments called microfibrils. The microfibrils become part of the fibers that provide strength and flexibility to connective tissues, which support the bones, skin, and other tissues and organs. Additionally, microfibrils store molecules called growth factors, including transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β), and release them at various times to control the growth and repair of tissues and organs throughout the body. Most of the FBN1 gene mutations that cause acromicric dysplasia change single protein building blocks in the fibrillin-1 protein. The mutations result in a reduction and disorganization of the microfibrils. Without enough normal microfibrils to store TGF-β, the growth factor is abnormally active. These effects likely contribute to the physical abnormalities that occur in acromicric dysplasia, but the mechanisms are unclear. Learn more about the gene associated with Acromicric dysplasia FBN1 Inheritance Acromicric dysplasia is an autosomal dominant condition, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Most cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. In other cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent . Other Names for This Condition ACMICD Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Acromicric dysplasia Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Acromicric dysplasia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM ACROMICRIC DYSPLASIA; ACMICD Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Faivre L, Le Merrer M, Baumann C, Polak M, Chatelain P, Sulmont V, Cousin J,
Bost M, Cordier MP, Zackai E, Russell K, Finidori G, Pouliquen JC, Munnich A,
Maroteaux P, Cormier-Daire V. Acromicric dysplasia: long term outcome and
evidence of autosomal dominant inheritance. J Med Genet. 2001 Nov;38(11):745-9.
doi: 10.1136/jmg.38.11.745. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Klein C, Le Goff C, Topouchian V, Odent S, Violas P, Glorion C, Cormier-Daire
V. Orthopedics management of acromicric dysplasia: follow up of nine patients. Am
J Med Genet A. 2014 Feb;164A(2):331-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36139. Epub 2013 Dec
11. Citation on PubMed Le Goff C, Mahaut C, Wang LW, Allali S, Abhyankar A, Jensen S, Zylberberg L,
Collod-Beroud G, Bonnet D, Alanay Y, Brady AF, Cordier MP, Devriendt K, Genevieve
D, Kiper PO, Kitoh H, Krakow D, Lynch SA, Le Merrer M, Megarbane A, Mortier G,
Odent S, Polak M, Rohrbach M, Sillence D, Stolte-Dijkstra I, Superti-Furga A,
Rimoin DL, Topouchian V, Unger S, Zabel B, Bole-Feysot C, Nitschke P, Handford P,
Casanova JL, Boileau C, Apte SS, Munnich A, Cormier-Daire V. Mutations in the
TGFbeta binding-protein-like domain 5 of FBN1 are responsible for acromicric and
geleophysic dysplasias. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Jul 15;89(1):7-14. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.05.012. Epub 2011 Jun 16. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Bone Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 1, 2014