Familial isolated pituitary adenoma: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Familial isolated pituitary adenoma URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/familial-isolated-pituitary-adenoma/ Familial isolated pituitary adenoma To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Familial isolated pituitary adenoma (FIPA) is an inherited condition characterized by development of a noncancerous tumor in the pituitary gland (called a pituitary adenoma). The pituitary gland, which is found at the base of the brain, produces hormones that control many important body functions. Tumors that form in the pituitary gland can release excess levels of one or more hormones, although some tumors do not produce hormones (nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas). Those that do are typically distinguished by the particular hormones they produce. Prolactinomas are the most common tumors in FIPA. These tumors release prolactin, a hormone that stimulates breast milk production in females. Both women and men can develop prolactinomas, although they are more common in women. In women, these tumors may lead to changes in the menstrual cycle or difficulty becoming pregnant. Some affected women may produce breast milk, even though they are not pregnant or nursing. In men, prolactinomas may cause erectile dysfunction or decreased interest in sex. Rarely, affected men produce breast milk. Large prolactinomas can press on nearby tissues such as the nerves that carry information from the eyes to the brain ( the optic nerves ), causing problems with vision. Another type of tumor called somatotropinoma is also common in FIPA. These tumors release growth hormone (also called somatotropin), which promotes growth of the body. Somatotropinomas in children or adolescents can lead to increased height (gigantism), because the long bones of their arms and legs are still growing. In adults, growth of the long bones has stopped, but the tumors can cause overgrowth of the hands, feet, and face (acromegaly) as well as other tissues. Less common tumor types in FIPA include somatolactotropinomas, nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas, adrenocorticotropic hormone-secreting tumors (which cause a condition known as Cushing disease ), thyrotropinomas, and gonadotropinomas. In a family with the condition, affected members can develop the same type of tumor (homogenous FIPA) or different types (heterogenous FIPA). In FIPA, pituitary tumors usually occur at a younger age than sporadic pituitary adenomas, which are not inherited. In general, FIPA tumors are also larger than sporadic pituitary tumors. Often, people with FIPA have macroadenomas, which are tumors larger than 10 millimeters. Familial pituitary adenomas can occur as one of many features in other inherited conditions such as multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 and Carney complex ; however, in FIPA, the pituitary adenomas are described as isolated because only the pituitary gland is affected. Frequency Pituitary adenomas, including sporadic tumors, are relatively common; they are identified in an estimated 1 in 1,000 people. FIPA, though, is quite rare, accounting for approximately 2 percent of pituitary adenomas. More than 200 families with FIPA have been described in the medical literature. Causes FIPA can be caused by mutations in the AIP gene. The function of the protein produced from this gene is not well understood, but it is thought to act as a tumor suppressor, which means it helps prevent cells from growing and dividing in an uncontrolled way. Mutations in the AIP gene alter the protein or reduce the production of functional protein. These changes likely impair the ability of the AIP protein to control the growth and division of cells, allowing pituitary cells to grow and divide unchecked and form a tumor. It is not known why the pituitary gland is specifically affected or why certain types of pituitary adenomas develop. AIP gene mutations account for approximately 15 to 25 percent of cases of FIPA. Somatotropinomas are the most common type of tumor in these individuals. The tumors usually occur at a younger age, often in childhood, and are larger than FIPA tumors not caused by AIP gene mutations. The other genetic causes of FIPA are unknown. Learn more about the gene associated with Familial isolated pituitary adenoma AIP Inheritance FIPA is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. However, only 20 to 30 percent of individuals with an AIP gene mutation develop a pituitary adenoma. This phenomenon, in which some individuals with a mutation do not develop the features of a particular disorder, is called incomplete penetrance. Other Names for This Condition FIPA Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: AIP-Related Familial Isolated Pituitary Adenomas Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Familial isolated pituitary adenoma Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PITUITARY ADENOMA 1, MULTIPLE TYPES; PITA1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Beckers A, Aaltonen LA, Daly AF, Karhu A. Familial isolated pituitary adenomas
(FIPA) and the pituitary adenoma predisposition due to mutations in the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (AIP) gene. Endocr Rev. 2013
Apr;34(2):239-77. doi: 10.1210/er.2012-1013. Epub 2013 Jan 31. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Beckers A, Daly AF. The clinical, pathological, and genetic features of
familial isolated pituitary adenomas. Eur J Endocrinol. 2007 Oct;157(4):371-82.
doi: 10.1530/EJE-07-0348. Citation on PubMed Chahal HS, Chapple JP, Frohman LA, Grossman AB, Korbonits M. Clinical, genetic
and molecular characterization of patients with familial isolated pituitary
adenomas (FIPA). Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Jul;21(7):419-27. doi:
10.1016/j.tem.2010.02.007. Epub 2010 Jun 1. Citation on PubMed Daly AF, Jaffrain-Rea ML, Ciccarelli A, Valdes-Socin H, Rohmer V, Tamburrano
G, Borson-Chazot C, Estour B, Ciccarelli E, Brue T, Ferolla P, Emy P, Colao A, De
Menis E, Lecomte P, Penfornis F, Delemer B, Bertherat J, Wemeau JL, De Herder W,
Archambeaud F, Stevenaert A, Calender A, Murat A, Cavagnini F, Beckers A.
Clinical characterization of familial isolated pituitary adenomas. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Sep;91(9):3316-23. doi: 10.1210/jc.2005-2671. Epub 2006
Jun 20. Citation on PubMed Daly AF, Rixhon M, Adam C, Dempegioti A, Tichomirowa MA, Beckers A. High
prevalence of pituitary adenomas: a cross-sectional study in the province of
Liege, Belgium. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Dec;91(12):4769-75. doi:
10.1210/jc.2006-1668. Epub 2006 Sep 12. Citation on PubMed Leontiou CA, Gueorguiev M, van der Spuy J, Quinton R, Lolli F, Hassan S,
Chahal HS, Igreja SC, Jordan S, Rowe J, Stolbrink M, Christian HC, Wray J,
Bishop-Bailey D, Berney DM, Wass JA, Popovic V, Ribeiro-Oliveira A Jr, Gadelha
MR, Monson JP, Akker SA, Davis JR, Clayton RN, Yoshimoto K, Iwata T, Matsuno A,
Eguchi K, Musat M, Flanagan D, Peters G, Bolger GB, Chapple JP, Frohman LA,
Grossman AB, Korbonits M. The role of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting
protein gene in familial and sporadic pituitary adenomas. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2008 Jun;93(6):2390-401. doi: 10.1210/jc.2007-2611. Epub 2008 Apr 1. Citation on PubMed Vierimaa O, Georgitsi M, Lehtonen R, Vahteristo P, Kokko A, Raitila A,
Tuppurainen K, Ebeling TM, Salmela PI, Paschke R, Gundogdu S, De Menis E, Makinen
MJ, Launonen V, Karhu A, Aaltonen LA. Pituitary adenoma predisposition caused by
germline mutations in the AIP gene. Science. 2006 May 26;312(5777):1228-30. doi:
10.1126/science.1126100. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Endocrine Diseases Genetic Disorders Pituitary Tumors MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Acromegaly Genetics Gigantism Pituitary tumor Prolactinoma Related Medical Tests Adrenocorticotropic Hormone (ACTH) Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2013