DICER1 syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → DICER1 syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/dicer1-syndrome/ DICER1 syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description DICER1 syndrome is an inherited disorder that increases the risk of a variety of cancerous and noncancerous (benign) tumors, most commonly certain types of tumors that occur in the lungs, kidneys, ovaries , and thyroid (a butterfly-shaped gland in the lower neck). Affected individuals can develop one or more types of tumors, and members of the same family can have different types. However, the risk of tumor formation in individuals with DICER1 syndrome is only moderately increased compared with tumor risk in the general population; most individuals with genetic changes associated with this condition never develop tumors. People with DICER1 syndrome who develop tumors most commonly develop pleuropulmonary blastoma, which is characterized by tumors that grow in lung tissue or in the outer covering of the lungs (the pleura). These tumors occur in infants and young children and are rare in adults. Pleuropulmonary blastoma is classified as one of three types on the basis of tumor characteristics: in type I, the growths are composed of air-filled pockets called cysts; in type II, the growths contain both cysts and solid tumors (or nodules); and in type III, the growth is a solid tumor that can fill a large portion of the chest. Pleuropulmonary blastoma is considered cancerous, and types II and III can spread (metastasize), often to the brain, liver, or bones. Individuals with pleuropulmonary blastoma may also develop an abnormal accumulation of air in the chest cavity that can lead to the collapse of a lung (pneumothorax). Cystic nephroma, which involves multiple benign fluid-filled cysts in the kidneys, can also occur; in people with DICER1 syndrome, the cysts develop early in childhood. DICER1 syndrome is also associated with tumors in the ovaries known as Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors, which typically develop in affected women in their teens or twenties. Some Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors release the male sex hormone testosterone; in these cases, affected women may develop facial hair, a deep voice, and other male characteristics. Some affected women have irregular menstrual cycles. Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors usually do not metastasize. People with DICER1 syndrome are also at risk of multinodular goiter, which is enlargement of the thyroid gland caused by the growth of multiple fluid-filled or solid tumors (both referred to as nodules). The nodules are generally slow-growing and benign. Despite the growths, the thyroid's function is often normal. Rarely, individuals with DICER1 syndrome develop thyroid cancer (thyroid carcinoma). Frequency DICER1 syndrome is a rare condition; its prevalence is unknown. Causes DICER1 syndrome is caused by mutations in the DICER1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is involved in the production of molecules called microRNA (miRNA). MicroRNA is a type of RNA, a chemical cousin of DNA, that attaches to a protein's blueprint (a molecule called messenger RNA) and blocks the production of proteins from it. Through this role in regulating the activity (expression) of genes, the Dicer protein is involved in many processes, including cell growth and division (proliferation) and the maturation of cells to take on specialized functions (differentiation). Most of the gene mutations involved in DICER1 syndrome lead to an abnormally short Dicer protein that is unable to aid in the production of miRNA. Without appropriate regulation by miRNA, genes are likely expressed abnormally, which could cause cells to grow and divide uncontrollably and lead to tumor formation. Learn more about the gene associated with DICER1 syndrome DICER1 Inheritance DICER1 syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene is sufficient to cause the disorder. It is important to note that people inherit an increased risk of tumors; many people who have mutations in the DICER1 gene do not develop abnormal growths. Other Names for This Condition DICER1-related pleuropulmonary blastoma cancer predisposition syndrome Pleuropulmonary blastoma familial tumor and dysplasia syndrome Pleuropulmonary blastoma family tumor susceptibility syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Pleuropulmonary blastoma Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Pleuropulmonary blastoma familial tumor susceptibility syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM GOITER, MULTINODULAR 1, WITH OR WITHOUT SERTOLI-LEYDIG CELL TUMORS; MNG1 PLEUROPULMONARY BLASTOMA; PPB Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bahubeshi A, Bal N, Rio Frio T, Hamel N, Pouchet C, Yilmaz A, Bouron-Dal
Soglio D, Williams GM, Tischkowitz M, Priest JR, Foulkes WD. Germline DICER1
mutations and familial cystic nephroma. J Med Genet. 2010 Dec;47(12):863-6. doi:
10.1136/jmg.2010.081216. Epub 2010 Oct 29. Citation on PubMed Durieux E, Descotes F, Mauduit C, Decaussin M, Guyetant S,
Devouassoux-Shisheboran M. The co-occurrence of an ovarian Sertoli-Leydig cell
tumor with a thyroid carcinoma is highly suggestive of a DICER1 syndrome.
Virchows Arch. 2016 May;468(5):631-6. doi: 10.1007/s00428-016-1922-0. Epub 2016
Mar 16. Citation on PubMed Foulkes WD, Bahubeshi A, Hamel N, Pasini B, Asioli S, Baynam G, Choong CS,
Charles A, Frieder RP, Dishop MK, Graf N, Ekim M, Bouron-Dal Soglio D, Arseneau
J, Young RH, Sabbaghian N, Srivastava A, Tischkowitz MD, Priest JR. Extending the
phenotypes associated with DICER1 mutations. Hum Mutat. 2011 Dec;32(12):1381-4.
doi: 10.1002/humu.21600. Epub 2011 Oct 11. Citation on PubMed Hill DA, Ivanovich J, Priest JR, Gurnett CA, Dehner LP, Desruisseau D,
Jarzembowski JA, Wikenheiser-Brokamp KA, Suarez BK, Whelan AJ, Williams G,
Bracamontes D, Messinger Y, Goodfellow PJ. DICER1 mutations in familial
pleuropulmonary blastoma. Science. 2009 Aug 21;325(5943):965. doi:
10.1126/science.1174334. Epub 2009 Jun 25. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Rio Frio T, Bahubeshi A, Kanellopoulou C, Hamel N, Niedziela M, Sabbaghian N,
Pouchet C, Gilbert L, O'Brien PK, Serfas K, Broderick P, Houlston RS, Lesueur F,
Bonora E, Muljo S, Schimke RN, Bouron-Dal Soglio D, Arseneau J, Schultz KA,
Priest JR, Nguyen VH, Harach HR, Livingston DM, Foulkes WD, Tischkowitz M. DICER1
mutations in familial multinodular goiter with and without ovarian Sertoli-Leydig
cell tumors. JAMA. 2011 Jan 5;305(1):68-77. doi: 10.1001/jama.2010.1910. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Schultz KA, Pacheco MC, Yang J, Williams GM, Messinger Y, Hill DA, Dehner LP,
Priest JR. Ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors, pleuropulmonary blastoma and DICER1
mutations: a report from the International Pleuropulmonary Blastoma Registry.
Gynecol Oncol. 2011 Aug;122(2):246-50. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2011.03.024. Epub
2011 Apr 17. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Slade I, Bacchelli C, Davies H, Murray A, Abbaszadeh F, Hanks S, Barfoot R,
Burke A, Chisholm J, Hewitt M, Jenkinson H, King D, Morland B, Pizer B, Prescott
K, Saggar A, Side L, Traunecker H, Vaidya S, Ward P, Futreal PA, Vujanic G,
Nicholson AG, Sebire N, Turnbull C, Priest JR, Pritchard-Jones K, Houlston R,
Stiller C, Stratton MR, Douglas J, Rahman N. DICER1 syndrome: clarifying the
diagnosis, clinical features and management implications of a pleiotropic tumour
predisposition syndrome. J Med Genet. 2011 Apr;48(4):273-8. doi:
10.1136/jmg.2010.083790. Epub 2011 Jan 25. Citation on PubMed Yin Y, Castro AM, Hoekstra M, Yan TJ, Kanakamedala AC, Dehner LP, Hill DA,
Ornitz DM. Fibroblast Growth Factor 9 Regulation by MicroRNAs Controls Lung
Development and Links DICER1 Loss to the Pathogenesis of Pleuropulmonary
Blastoma. PLoS Genet. 2015 May 15;11(5):e1005242. doi:
10.1371/journal.pgen.1005242. eCollection 2015 May. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Cancer Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated May 1, 2016