Otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/otospondylomegaepiphyseal-dysplasia/ Otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia (OSMED) is a condition characterized by skeletal abnormalities, distinctive facial features, and severe hearing loss.  The term "otospondylomegaepiphyseal" refers to the parts of the body that this condition affects: the ears (oto-), the bones of the spine (spondylo-), and the ends (epiphyses) of long bones in the arms and legs. The features of this condition significantly overlap those of two similar conditions, Weissenbacher-Zweymüller syndrome and Stickler syndrome type III. All of these conditions are caused by mutations in the same gene, and in some cases, it can be difficult to tell the conditions apart. Some researchers believe they represent a single disorder with a range of signs and symptoms. People with OSMED are often shorter than average because the long bones in their legs are unusually short. Other skeletal features include enlarged joints; short arms, hands, and fingers ; and flattened bones of the spine (platyspondyly). People with the disorder often experience back and joint pain, limited joint movement, and arthritis that begins early in life. Severe high-frequency hearing loss is common in people with OSMED. Typical facial features include protruding eyes ; a flattened bridge of the nose ; an upturned nose with a large, rounded tip; and a small lower jaw . Almost all affected infants are born with an opening in the roof of the mouth (a cleft palate ). Frequency This condition is rare; its prevalence is unknown. Only a few families with OSMED worldwide have been described in the medical literature. Causes OSMED is caused by mutations in the COL11A2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making one component of type XI collagen, which is a complex molecule that gives structure and strength to the connective tissues that support the body's joints and organs. Type XI collagen is found in cartilage, a tough but flexible tissue that makes up much of the skeleton during early development. Most cartilage is later converted to bone, except for the cartilage that continues to cover and protect the ends of bones and is present in the nose and external ears. Type XI collagen is also part of the inner ear and the nucleus pulposus, which is the center portion of the discs between vertebrae . The COL11A2 gene mutations that cause OSMED disrupt the production or assembly of type XI collagen molecules. The defective collagen weakens connective tissues in many parts of the body, including the long bones, spine, and inner ears, which impairs bone development and underlies the other signs and symptoms of this condition. Learn more about the gene associated with Otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia COL11A2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Chondrodystrophy with sensorineural deafness Insley-Astley syndrome Mega-epiphyseal dwarfism Nance-Insley syndrome Nance-Sweeney chondrodysplasia OSMED Oto-spondylo-megaepiphyseal dysplasia Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia, autosomal dominant Genetic Testing Registry: Otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia, autosomal recessive Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM OTOSPONDYLOMEGAEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE; OSMEDB Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Harel T, Rabinowitz R, Hendler N, Galil A, Flusser H, Chemke J, Gradstein L,
Lifshitz T, Ofir R, Elbedour K, Birk OS. COL11A2 mutation associated with
autosomal recessive Weissenbacher-Zweymuller syndrome: molecular and clinical
overlap with otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia (OSMED). Am J Med Genet A. 2005
Jan 1;132A(1):33-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30371. Citation on PubMed Melkoniemi M, Brunner HG, Manouvrier S, Hennekam R, Superti-Furga A,
Kaariainen H, Pauli RM, van Essen T, Warman ML, Bonaventure J, Miny P, Ala-Kokko
L. Autosomal recessive disorder otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia is associated
with loss-of-function mutations in the COL11A2 gene. Am J Hum Genet. 2000
Feb;66(2):368-77. doi: 10.1086/302750. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Temtamy SA, Mannikko M, Abdel-Salam GM, Hassan NA, Ala-Kokko L, Afifi HH.
Oto-spondylo-megaepiphyseal dysplasia (OSMED): clinical and radiological findings
in sibs homozygous for premature stop codon mutation in the COL11A2 gene. Am J
Med Genet A. 2006 Jun 1;140(11):1189-95. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31205. Citation on PubMed van Steensel MA, Buma P, de Waal Malefijt MC, van den Hoogen FH, Brunner HG.
Oto- spondylo-megaepiphyseal dysplasia (OSMED): clinical description of three
patients homozygous for a missense mutation in the COL11A2 gene. Am J Med Genet.
1997 Jun 13;70(3):315-23. doi:
10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(19970613)70:33.3.co;2-y. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Bone Diseases Connective Tissue Disorders Genetic Disorders Hearing Disorders and Deafness MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated May 1, 2016