X-linked chondrodysplasia punctata 1: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → X-linked chondrodysplasia punctata 1 URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/x-linked-chondrodysplasia-punctata-1/ X-linked chondrodysplasia punctata 1 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description X-linked chondrodysplasia punctata 1 is a disorder of cartilage and bone development that occurs almost exclusively in males. Chondrodysplasia punctata is an abnormality that appears on x-rays as spots (stippling) near the ends of bones and in cartilage. In most infants with X-linked chondrodysplasia punctata 1, this stippling is seen in bones of the ankles, toes, and fingers; however, it can also appear in other bones. The stippling generally disappears in early childhood. Other characteristic features of X-linked chondrodysplasia punctata 1 include short stature and unusually short fingertips and ends of the toes. This condition is also associated with distinctive facial features, particularly a flattened-appearing nose with crescent-shaped nostrils and a flat nasal bridge . People with X-linked chondrodysplasia punctata 1 typically have normal intelligence and a normal life expectancy. However, some affected individuals have had serious or life-threatening complications including abnormal thickening (stenosis) of the cartilage that makes up the airways , which restricts breathing. Also, abnormalities of spinal bones in the neck can lead to pinching (compression) of the spinal cord, which can cause pain, numbness, and weakness. Other, less common features of X-linked chondrodysplasia punctata 1 include delayed development, hearing loss, vision abnormalities, and heart defects. Frequency The prevalence of X-linked chondrodysplasia punctata 1 is unknown. Several dozen affected males have been reported in the scientific literature. Causes X-linked chondrodysplasia punctata 1 is caused by genetic changes involving the ARSL gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called arylsulfatase L. The function of this enzyme is unknown, although it appears to be important for normal skeletal development and is thought to participate in a chemical pathway involving vitamin K. Evidence suggests that vitamin K normally plays a role in bone growth and maintenance of bone density. Between 60 and 75 percent of males with the characteristic features of  X-linked chondrodysplasia punctata 1 have a mutation in the ARSL gene. These mutations reduce or eliminate the function of arylsulfatase L. Another 25 percent of affected males have a small deletion of genetic material from the region of the X chromosome that contains the ARSL gene. These individuals are missing the entire gene, so their cells produce no functional arylsulfatase L. Researchers are working to determine how a shortage of arylsulfatase L disrupts the development of bones and cartilage and leads to the characteristic features of X-linked chondrodysplasia punctata 1. Some people with the features of X-linked chondrodysplasia punctata 1 do not have an identified mutation in the ARSE gene or a deletion involving the gene. Other, as-yet-unidentified genetic and environmental factors may also be involved in causing this disorder. Learn more about the gene associated with X-linked chondrodysplasia punctata 1 ARSL Inheritance This condition is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern . The gene associated with this condition is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes . In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the ARSL gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons. Other Names for This Condition Arylsulfatase E deficiency CDPX1 Chondrodysplasia punctata 1, X-linked X-linked recessive chondrodysplasia punctata 1 Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Chondrodysplasia punctata, brachytelephalangic, autosomal Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Brachytelephalangic chondrodysplasia punctata Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CHONDRODYSPLASIA PUNCTATA 1, X-LINKED RECESSIVE; CDPX1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Braverman NE, Bober MB, Brunetti-Pierri N, Suchy SF. Chondrodysplasia Punctata
1, X-Linked. 2008 Apr 22 [updated 2020 Oct 15]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa
GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1544/ Citation on PubMed Brunetti-Pierri N, Andreucci MV, Tuzzi R, Vega GR, Gray G, McKeown C, Ballabio
A, Andria G, Meroni G, Parenti G. X-linked recessive chondrodysplasia punctata:
spectrum of arylsulfatase E gene mutations and expanded clinical variability. Am
J Med Genet A. 2003 Mar 1;117A(2):164-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.10950. Citation on PubMed Casarin A, Rusalen F, Doimo M, Trevisson E, Carraro S, Clementi M, Tenconi R,
Baraldi E, Salviati L. X-linked brachytelephalangic chondrodysplasia punctata: a
simple trait that is not so simple. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Nov;149A(11):2464-8.
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33039. Citation on PubMed Daniele A, Parenti G, d'Addio M, Andria G, Ballabio A, Meroni G. Biochemical
characterization of arylsulfatase E and functional analysis of mutations found in
patients with X-linked chondrodysplasia punctata. Am J Hum Genet. 1998
Mar;62(3):562-72. doi: 10.1086/301746. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Garnier A, Dauger S, Eurin D, Parisi I, Parenti G, Garel C, Delbecque K,
Baumann C. Brachytelephalangic chondrodysplasia punctata with severe spinal cord
compression: report of four new cases. Eur J Pediatr. 2007 Apr;166(4):327-31.
doi: 10.1007/s00431-006-0239-4. Epub 2006 Aug 26. Citation on PubMed Maroteaux P. Brachytelephalangic chondrodysplasia punctata: a possible
X-linked recessive form. Hum Genet. 1989 May;82(2):167-70. doi:
10.1007/BF00284052. Citation on PubMed Nino M, Matos-Miranda C, Maeda M, Chen L, Allanson J, Armour C, Greene C,
Kamaluddeen M, Rita D, Medne L, Zackai E, Mansour S, Superti-Furga A, Lewanda A,
Bober M, Rosenbaum K, Braverman N. Clinical and molecular analysis of
arylsulfatase E in patients with brachytelephalangic chondrodysplasia punctata.
Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Apr 15;146A(8):997-1008. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32159. Citation on PubMed Sheffield LJ, Osborn AH, Hutchison WM, Sillence DO, Forrest SM, White SJ, Dahl
HH. Segregation of mutations in arylsulphatase E and correlation with the
clinical presentation of chondrodysplasia punctata. J Med Genet. 1998
Dec;35(12):1004-8. doi: 10.1136/jmg.35.12.1004. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Bone Diseases Genetic Disorders Vitamin K MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated November 1, 2011