Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/cerebrotendinous-xanthomatosis/ Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis is a disorder characterized by abnormal storage of fats (lipids) in many areas of the body. People with this disorder cannot break down certain lipids effectively, specifically different forms of cholesterol, so these fats accumulate in the body in the form of fatty yellow nodules called xanthomas. These xanthomas are most commonly found in the brain and in connective tissue called tendons that attach muscle to bone, which is reflected in the condition name (cerebro- meaning brain and -tendinous referring to tendons). People with cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis often develop neurological problems in early adulthood that are thought to be caused by an abnormal accumulation of fats and an increasing number of xanthomas in the brain. These neurological problems include recurrent seizures (epilepsy), movement disorders, impaired speech (dysarthria), loss of sensation in the arms and legs (peripheral neuropathy), decline in intellectual function (dementia), hallucinations, and depression . Xanthomas can accumulate in the fatty substance that insulates and protects nerves ( myelin ), causing the destruction of myelin and disrupting nerve signaling in the brain. Degeneration (atrophy) of brain tissue caused by excess lipid deposits also contributes to the neurological problems. Xanthomas in the tendons begin to form in early adulthood. The most common areas for xanthomas to develop are tendons in the hands, elbows, knees, neck, and in the Achilles tendon, which connects the heel of the foot to the calf muscles in the leg. Tendon xanthomas may cause discomfort and interfere with tendon flexibility. While many affected people develop tendon xanthomas, these nodules may not be easily visible underneath the skin. Other features of cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis include clouding of the lenses of the eyes ( cataracts ) and chronic diarrhea in childhood; a reduced ability to produce and release a digestive fluid called bile (cholestasis), which can lead to a yellowing of the skin or whites of the eyes (jaundice); and progressively brittle bones that are prone to fracture ( osteoporosis ). People with cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis are also at an increased risk of developing cardiovascular disease or respiratory failure because of lipid accumulation in the heart or lungs, respectively. If untreated, the signs and symptoms related to cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis worsen over time; however, this condition varies greatly among those who are affected. Frequency The incidence of cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis is estimated to be 1 per million individuals worldwide. This condition is more common in the Moroccan Jewish population with an incidence of 1 in 108 individuals. Causes Mutations in the CYP27A1 gene cause cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis. The CYP27A1 gene provides instructions for producing an enzyme called sterol 27-hydroxylase. This enzyme works in the pathway that breaks down cholesterol to form acids used in the digestion of fats (bile acids), specifically a bile acid called chenodeoxycholic acid. Mutations in the CYP27A1 gene lead to the production of a nonfunction or abnormal sterol 27-hydroxylase that cannot help form chenodeoxycholic acid. As a result, other molecules are formed by an alternative pathway. A molecule called cholestanol, which is similar to cholesterol, is produced as well as substances called bile alcohols. Cholestanol and bile alcohols are increased in the blood, while blood cholesterol levels are typically normal. In various tissues in the body, including the brain and heart, cholesterol and cholestanol levels are increased. These lipids make up much of the fats found in xanthomas. The accumulation of cholesterol and cholestanol throughout the body's tissues causes the signs and symptoms of cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis. Learn more about the gene associated with Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis CYP27A1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Cerebral cholesterinosis Cerebrotendinous cholesterinosis Cholestanol storage disease Cholestanolosis CTX Van Bogaert-Scherer-Epstein disease Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Cholestanol storage disease Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CEREBROTENDINOUS XANTHOMATOSIS; CTX Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bhattacharyya AK, Lin DS, Connor WE. Cholestanol metabolism in patients with
cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis: absorption, turnover, and tissue deposition. J
Lipid Res. 2007 Jan;48(1):185-92. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M600113-JLR200. Epub 2006 Oct
1. Citation on PubMed Bjorkhem I. Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2013
Aug;24(4):283-7. doi: 10.1097/MOL.0b013e328362df13. Citation on PubMed Gallus GN, Dotti MT, Federico A. Clinical and molecular diagnosis of
cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis with a review of the mutations in the CYP27A1
gene. Neurol Sci. 2006 Jun;27(2):143-9. doi: 10.1007/s10072-006-0618-7. Citation on PubMed Mignarri A, Gallus GN, Dotti MT, Federico A. A suspicion index for early
diagnosis and treatment of cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis. J Inherit Metab Dis.
2014 May;37(3):421-9. doi: 10.1007/s10545-013-9674-3. Epub 2014 Jan 18. Citation on PubMed Moghadasian MH. Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis: clinical course, genotypes and
metabolic backgrounds. Clin Invest Med. 2004 Feb;27(1):42-50. Citation on PubMed Nie S, Chen G, Cao X, Zhang Y. Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis: a comprehensive
review of pathogenesis, clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and management.
Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2014 Nov 26;9:179. doi: 10.1186/s13023-014-0179-4. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Cholesterol Genetic Brain Disorders Genetic Disorders Lipid Metabolism Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated September 1, 2016