Cyclic neutropenia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Cyclic neutropenia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/cyclic-neutropenia/ Cyclic neutropenia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Cyclic neutropenia is a disorder that causes frequent infections and other health problems in affected individuals. People with this condition have recurrent episodes of neutropenia during which there is a shortage (deficiency) of neutrophils . Neutrophils are a type of white blood cell that plays a role in inflammation and in fighting infection. The episodes of neutropenia are apparent at birth or soon afterward. For most affected individuals, neutropenia recurs every 21 days and lasts about 3 to 5 days. Neutropenia makes it more difficult for the body to fight off pathogens such as bacteria and viruses, so people with cyclic neutropenia typically develop recurrent infections of the sinuses, respiratory tract, and skin. Additionally, people with this condition often develop open sores (ulcers) in the mouth and colon, inflammation of the throat (pharyngitis) and gums (gingivitis), recurrent fever, or abdominal pain. People with cyclic neutropenia have these health problems only during episodes of neutropenia. At times when their neutrophil levels are normal, they are not at an increased risk of infection and inflammation. Frequency Cyclic neutropenia is a rare condition and is estimated to occur in 1 in 1 million individuals worldwide. Causes Mutations in the ELANE gene cause cyclic neutropenia. The ELANE gene provides instructions for making a protein called neutrophil elastase, which is found in neutrophils. When the body starts an immune response to fight an infection, neutrophils release neutrophil elastase. This protein then modifies the function of certain cells and proteins to help fight the infection. ELANE gene mutations that cause cyclic neutropenia lead to an abnormal neutrophil elastase protein that seems to retain some of its function. However, neutrophils that produce abnormal neutrophil elastase protein appear to have a shorter lifespan than normal neutrophils. The shorter neutrophil lifespan is thought to be responsible for the cyclic nature of this condition. When the affected neutrophils die early, there is a period in which there is a shortage of neutrophils because it takes time for the body to replenish its supply. Learn more about the gene associated with Cyclic neutropenia ELANE Inheritance Cyclic neutropenia is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent . Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Other Names for This Condition Cyclic hematopoesis Cyclic leucopenia Periodic neutropenia Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Cyclical neutropenia Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Cyclic neutropenia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CYCLIC NEUTROPENIA Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bellanne-Chantelot C, Clauin S, Leblanc T, Cassinat B, Rodrigues-Lima F,
Beaufils S, Vaury C, Barkaoui M, Fenneteau O, Maier-Redelsperger M, Chomienne C,
Donadieu J. Mutations in the ELA2 gene correlate with more severe expression of
neutropenia: a study of 81 patients from the French Neutropenia Register. Blood.
2004 Jun 1;103(11):4119-25. doi: 10.1182/blood-2003-10-3518. Epub 2004 Feb 12. Citation on PubMed Germeshausen M, Deerberg S, Peter Y, Reimer C, Kratz CP, Ballmaier M. The
spectrum of ELANE mutations and their implications in severe congenital and
cyclic neutropenia. Hum Mutat. 2013 Jun;34(6):905-14. doi: 10.1002/humu.22308.
Epub 2013 Apr 2. Citation on PubMed Horwitz MS, Duan Z, Korkmaz B, Lee HH, Mealiffe ME, Salipante SJ. Neutrophil
elastase in cyclic and severe congenital neutropenia. Blood. 2007 Mar
1;109(5):1817-24. doi: 10.1182/blood-2006-08-019166. Epub 2006 Oct 19. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Makaryan V, Zeidler C, Bolyard AA, Skokowa J, Rodger E, Kelley ML, Boxer LA,
Bonilla MA, Newburger PE, Shimamura A, Zhu B, Rosenberg PS, Link DC, Welte K,
Dale DC. The diversity of mutations and clinical outcomes for ELANE-associated
neutropenia. Curr Opin Hematol. 2015 Jan;22(1):3-11. doi:
10.1097/MOH.0000000000000105. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Sera Y, Kawaguchi H, Nakamura K, Sato T, Habara M, Okada S, Ishikawa N, Kojima
S, Katoh O, Kobayashi M. A comparison of the defective granulopoiesis in
childhood cyclic neutropenia and in severe congenital neutropenia. Haematologica.
2005 Aug;90(8):1032-41. Citation on PubMed Skokowa J, Dale DC, Touw IP, Zeidler C, Welte K. Severe congenital
neutropenias. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2017 Jun 8;3:17032. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2017.32. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Blood Disorders Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Neutropenia - infants Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated October 1, 2018