Pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/pyridoxine-dependent-epilepsy/ Pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy is a condition that involves seizures beginning in infancy or, in some cases, before birth.  Those affected typically experience prolonged seizures lasting several minutes (status epilepticus).  These seizures involve muscle rigidity, convulsions, and loss of consciousness (tonic-clonic seizures).  Additional features of pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy include low body temperature (hypothermia), poor muscle tone (dystonia) soon after birth, and irritability before a seizure episode.  In rare instances, children with this condition do not have seizures until they are 1 to 3 years old. Anticonvulsant drugs,  which are usually given to control seizures, are ineffective in people with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy.  Instead, people with this type of seizure are medically treated with large daily doses of pyridoxine (a type of vitamin B6 found in food).  If left untreated, people with this condition can develop severe brain dysfunction (encephalopathy).  Even though seizures can be controlled with pyridoxine, neurological problems such as developmental delay and learning disorders may still occur. Frequency Pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy occurs in 1 in 100,000 to 700,000 individuals.  At least 100 cases have been reported worldwide. Causes Mutations in the ALDH7A1 gene cause pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy.  The ALDH7A1 gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called α-aminoadipic semialdehyde (α-AASA) dehydrogenase, also known as antiquitin.  This enzyme is involved in the breakdown of the protein building block ( amino acid ) lysine in the brain. When antiquitin is deficient, a molecule that interferes with vitamin B6 function builds up in various tissues.  Pyridoxine plays a role in many processes in the body, such as the breakdown of amino acids and the productions of chemicals that transmit signals in the brain ( neurotransmitters ).  It is unclear how a lack of pyridoxine causes the seizures that are characteristic of this condition. Some individuals with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy do not have identified mutations in the ALDH7A1 gene. In these cases, the cause of the condition is unknown. Learn more about the gene associated with Pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy ALDH7A1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition AASA dehydrogenase deficiency EPD Epilepsy, pyridoxine-dependent PDE Pyridoxine dependency Pyridoxine dependency with seizures Pyridoxine-dependent seizures Vitamin B6-dependent seizures Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM EPILEPSY, EARLY-ONSET, 4, VITAMIN B6-DEPENDENT; EPEO4 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bok LA, Struys E, Willemsen MA, Been JV, Jakobs C. Pyridoxine-dependent
seizures in Dutch patients: diagnosis by elevated urinary alpha-aminoadipic
semialdehyde levels. Arch Dis Child. 2007 Aug;92(8):687-9. doi:
10.1136/adc.2006.103192. Epub 2006 Nov 6. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Kanno J, Kure S, Narisawa A, Kamada F, Takayanagi M, Yamamoto K, Hoshino H,
Goto T, Takahashi T, Haginoya K, Tsuchiya S, Baumeister FA, Hasegawa Y, Aoki Y,
Yamaguchi S, Matsubara Y. Allelic and non-allelic heterogeneities in pyridoxine
dependent seizures revealed by ALDH7A1 mutational analysis. Mol Genet Metab. 2007
Aug;91(4):384-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.02.010. Epub 2007 Apr 11. Citation on PubMed Mills PB, Struys E, Jakobs C, Plecko B, Baxter P, Baumgartner M, Willemsen MA,
Omran H, Tacke U, Uhlenberg B, Weschke B, Clayton PT. Mutations in antiquitin in
individuals with pyridoxine-dependent seizures. Nat Med. 2006 Mar;12(3):307-9.
doi: 10.1038/nm1366. Epub 2006 Feb 19. Citation on PubMed Pearl PL, Taylor JL, Trzcinski S, Sokohl A. The pediatric neurotransmitter
disorders. J Child Neurol. 2007 May;22(5):606-16. doi: 10.1177/0883073807302619. Citation on PubMed Plecko B, Paul K, Paschke E, Stoeckler-Ipsiroglu S, Struys E, Jakobs C,
Hartmann H, Luecke T, di Capua M, Korenke C, Hikel C, Reutershahn E, Freilinger
M, Baumeister F, Bosch F, Erwa W. Biochemical and molecular characterization of
18 patients with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy and mutations of the antiquitin
(ALDH7A1) gene. Hum Mutat. 2007 Jan;28(1):19-26. doi: 10.1002/humu.20433. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Epilepsy Genetic Disorders Seizures MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Bilateral tonic-clonic seizure Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2013