Retinitis pigmentosa: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Retinitis pigmentosa URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/retinitis-pigmentosa/ Retinitis pigmentosa To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Retinitis pigmentosa is a group of related eye disorders that cause progressive vision loss. These disorders affect the retina, which is the layer of light-sensitive tissue at the back of the eye . In people with retinitis pigmentosa, vision loss occurs as the light-sensing cells of the retina gradually deteriorate. The first sign of retinitis pigmentosa is usually a loss of night vision, which becomes apparent in childhood. Problems with night vision can make it difficult to navigate in low light. Later, the disease causes blind spots to develop in the side (peripheral) vision. Over time, these blind spots  merge to produce tunnel vision. The disease progresses over years or decades to affect central vision, which is needed for detailed tasks such as reading, driving, and recognizing faces. In adulthood, many people with retinitis pigmentosa become legally blind. The signs and symptoms of retinitis pigmentosa are most often limited to vision loss. When the disorder occurs by itself, it is described as nonsyndromic. Researchers have identified several major types of nonsyndromic retinitis pigmentosa, which are usually distinguished by their pattern of inheritance: autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-linked. Less commonly, retinitis pigmentosa occurs as part of syndromes that affect other organs and tissues in the body. These forms of the disease are described as syndromic. The most common form of syndromic retinitis pigmentosa is Usher syndrome , which is characterized by the combination of vision loss and hearing loss beginning early in life. Retinitis pigmentosa is also a feature of several other genetic syndromes, including Bardet-Biedl syndrome ; Refsum disease ; and neuropathy, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP). Frequency Retinitis pigmentosa is one of the most common inherited diseases of the retina (retinopathies). It is estimated to affect 1 in 3,500 to 1 in 4,000 people in the United States and Europe. Causes Mutations in more than 60 genes are known to cause nonsyndromic retinitis pigmentosa. More than 20 of these genes are associated with the autosomal dominant form of the disorder. Mutations in the RHO gene are the most common cause of autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa, accounting for 20 to 30 percent of all cases. At least 35 genes have been associated with the autosomal recessive form of the disorder. The most common of these is USH2A ; mutations in this gene are responsible for 10 to 15 percent of all cases of autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa. Changes in at least six genes are thought to cause the X-linked form of the disorder. Together, mutations in the RPGR and RP2 genes account for most cases of X-linked retinitis pigmentosa. The genes associated with retinitis pigmentosa play essential roles in the structure and function of specialized light receptor cells (photoreceptors) in the retina. The retina contains two types of photoreceptors, rods and cones . Rods are responsible for vision in low light, while cones provide vision in bright light, including color vision. Mutations in any of the genes responsible for retinitis pigmentosa lead to a gradual loss of rods and cones in the retina. The progressive degeneration of these cells causes the characteristic pattern of vision loss that occurs in people with retinitis pigmentosa. Rods typically break down before cones, which is why night vision impairment is usually the first sign of the disorder. Daytime vision is disrupted later, as both rods and cones are lost. Some of the genes associated with retinitis pigmentosa are also associated with other eye diseases, including a condition called cone-rod dystrophy . Cone-rod dystrophy has signs and symptoms similar to those of retinitis pigmentosa. However, cone-rod dystrophy is characterized by deterioration of the cones first, followed by the rods, so daylight and color vision are affected before night vision. Learn more about the genes associated with Retinitis pigmentosa ABCA4 BEST1 CLRN1 CRB1 CRX PDE6B PRPH2 RHO RP2 RPE65 RPGR USH2A WDR19 Additional Information from NCBI Gene: CA4 CERKL CNGA1 CNGB1 EYS FAM161A FSCN2 GUCA1B IDH3B IMPDH1 IMPG2 KLHL7 LRAT MERTK MT-TS2 NR2E3 NRL PCARE PDE6A PDE6G PRCD PROM1 PRPF3 PRPF31 PRPF8 RBP3 RDH12 RGR RLBP1 ROM1 RP1 RP9 SAG SEMA4A SNRNP200 SPATA7 TOPORS TTC8 TULP1 ZNF513 Inheritance Retinitis pigmentosa often has an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern , which means one copy of an altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Most people with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa have an affected parent and other family members with the disorder. Retinitis pigmentosa can also have an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance, which means both copies of a gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. This condition can also be inherited in an X-linked pattern. The genes associated with X-linked retinitis pigmentosa are located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes . In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females, (who have two X chromosomes), mutations usually have to occur in both copes of the gene to cause the disorder. However, at least 20 percent of females who carry only one mutated copy of the gene develop retinal degeneration and associated vision loss. In most cases, males experience more severe symptoms of the disorder than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons. In 10 to 40 percent of all cases of retinitis pigmentosa, only one person in a family is affected. In these families, the disorder is described as simplex. It can be difficult to determine the inheritance pattern of simplex cases because affected individuals may have no affected relatives or may be unaware of other family members with the disease. Simplex cases can also result from a new gene mutation that is not present in other family members. Other Names for This Condition Pigmentary retinopathy Rod-cone dystrophy RP Tapetoretinal degeneration Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Retinitis pigmentosa Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Cone rod dystrophy Retinitis pigmentosa Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA; RP Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Daiger SP, Bowne SJ, Sullivan LS. Perspective on genes and mutations causing
retinitis pigmentosa. Arch Ophthalmol. 2007 Feb;125(2):151-8. doi:
10.1001/archopht.125.2.151. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Daiger SP, Sullivan LS, Gire AI, Birch DG, Heckenlively JR, Bowne SJ.
Mutations in known genes account for 58% of autosomal dominant retinitis
pigmentosa (adRP). Adv Exp Med Biol. 2008;613:203-9. doi:
10.1007/978-0-387-74904-4_23. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Fahim AT, Daiger SP, Weleber RG. Nonsyndromic Retinitis Pigmentosa Overview.
2000 Aug 4 [updated 2023 Apr 6]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA,
Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA):
University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1417/ Citation on PubMed Hamel C. Retinitis pigmentosa. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2006 Oct 11;1:40. doi:
10.1186/1750-1172-1-40. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Hartong DT, Berson EL, Dryja TP. Retinitis pigmentosa. Lancet. 2006 Nov
18;368(9549):1795-809. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69740-7. Citation on PubMed Pelletier V, Jambou M, Delphin N, Zinovieva E, Stum M, Gigarel N, Dollfus H,
Hamel C, Toutain A, Dufier JL, Roche O, Munnich A, Bonnefont JP, Kaplan J, Rozet
JM. Comprehensive survey of mutations in RP2 and RPGR in patients affected with
distinct retinal dystrophies: genotype-phenotype correlations and impact on
genetic counseling. Hum Mutat. 2007 Jan;28(1):81-91. doi: 10.1002/humu.20417. Citation on PubMed Sullivan LS, Bowne SJ, Birch DG, Hughbanks-Wheaton D, Heckenlively JR, Lewis
RA, Garcia CA, Ruiz RS, Blanton SH, Northrup H, Gire AI, Seaman R, Duzkale H,
Spellicy CJ, Zhu J, Shankar SP, Daiger SP. Prevalence of disease-causing
mutations in families with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa: a screen of
known genes in 200 families. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2006 Jul;47(7):3052-64.
doi: 10.1167/iovs.05-1443. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Retinal Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Retinitis pigmentosa Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated October 1, 2010