Crouzon syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Crouzon syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/crouzon-syndrome/ Crouzon syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Crouzon syndrome is a genetic disorder characterized by the premature fusion of certain skull bones (craniosynostosis).  This early fusion prevents the skull from growing normally and affects the shape of the head and face. Many features of Crouzon syndrome result from the premature fusion of the skull bones. Abnormal growth of these bones leads to wide-set, bulging eyes and vision problems caused by shallow eye sockets; eyes that do not point in the same direction (strabismus); a beaked nose; and an underdeveloped upper jaw. In addition, people with Crouzon syndrome may have dental problems and hearing loss, which is sometimes accompanied by narrow ear canals. A few individuals with Crouzon syndrome have an opening in the lip and the roof of the mouth ( cleft lip and palate ). The severity of these signs and symptoms varies among affected people. Individuals with Crouzon syndrome usually have normal intelligence. Frequency Crouzon syndrome is seen in about 16 per million newborns. It is the most common craniosynostosis syndrome. Causes Mutations in the FGFR2 gene cause Crouzon syndrome. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called fibroblast growth factor receptor 2. Among its multiple functions, this protein signals immature cells to become bone cells during embryonic development. Mutations in the FGFR2 gene are thought to result in production of an FGFR2 protein with overactive signaling, which causes the bones of the skull to fuse prematurely. Learn more about the gene associated with Crouzon syndrome FGFR2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition CFD1 Craniofacial dysarthrosis Craniofacial dysostosis Craniofacial dysostosis syndrome Craniofacial dysostosis type 1 Crouzon craniofacial dysostosis Crouzon disease Crouzon's disease Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Crouzon syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Crouzon syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CROUZON SYNDROME Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Azoury SC, Reddy S, Shukla V, Deng CX. Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor 2
(FGFR2) Mutation Related Syndromic Craniosynostosis. Int J Biol Sci.
2017 Nov 2;13(12):1479-1488. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.22373. eCollection 2017. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Carinci F, Pezzetti F, Locci P, Becchetti E, Carls F, Avantaggiato A,
Becchetti A, Carinci P, Baroni T, Bodo M. Apert and Crouzon syndromes: clinical
findings, genes and extracellular matrix. J Craniofac Surg. 2005 May;16(3):361-8.
doi: 10.1097/01.scs.0000157078.53871.11. Citation on PubMed Conrady CD, Patel BC. Crouzon Syndrome. 2023 Aug 7. In: StatPearls [Internet].
Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 Jan-. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK518998/ Citation on PubMed Galvin BD, Hart KC, Meyer AN, Webster MK, Donoghue DJ. Constitutive receptor
activation by Crouzon syndrome mutations in fibroblast growth factor receptor
(FGFR)2 and FGFR2/Neu chimeras. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Jul
23;93(15):7894-9. doi: 10.1073/pnas.93.15.7894. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Gray TL, Casey T, Selva D, Anderson PJ, David DJ. Ophthalmic sequelae of
Crouzon syndrome. Ophthalmology. 2005 Jun;112(6):1129-34. doi:
10.1016/j.ophtha.2004.12.037. Citation on PubMed Wenger T, Miller D, Evans K. FGFR Craniosynostosis Syndromes
Overview. 1998 Oct 20 [updated 2020 Apr 30]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM,
Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1455/ Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Craniofacial Abnormalities Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Craniosynostosis Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated January 1, 2020