Acatalasemia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Acatalasemia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/acatalasemia/ Acatalasemia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Acatalasemia is a condition characterized by very low levels of an enzyme called catalase. Many people with acatalasemia never have any health problems related to the condition and are diagnosed because they have affected family members. Some of the first reported individuals with acatalasemia developed open sores (ulcers) inside the mouth that led to the death of soft tissue (gangrene). When mouth ulcers and gangrene occur with acatalasemia, the condition is known as Takahara disease. These complications are rarely seen in more recent cases of acatalasemia, probably because of improvements in oral hygiene. Studies suggest that people with acatalasemia have an increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes , which is the most common form of diabetes. A higher percentage of people with acatalasemia have type 2 diabetes than in the general population, and the disease tends to develop at an earlier age (in a person's thirties or forties, on average). Researchers speculate that acatalasemia could also be a risk factor for other common, complex diseases; however, only a small number of cases have been studied. Frequency More than 100 cases of acatalasemia have been reported in the medical literature. Researchers estimate that the condition occurs in about 1 in 12,500 people in Japan, 1 in 20,000 people in Hungary, and 1 in 25,000 people in Switzerland. The prevalence of acatalasemia in other populations is unknown. Causes Mutations in the CAT gene can cause acatalasemia. This gene provides instructions for making the enzyme catalase, which breaks down hydrogen peroxide molecules into oxygen and water. Hydrogen peroxide is produced through chemical reactions within cells. At low levels, it is involved in several chemical signaling pathways, but at high levels it is toxic to cells. If hydrogen peroxide is not broken down by catalase, additional reactions convert it into compounds called reactive oxygen species that can damage DNA, proteins, and cell membranes. Mutations in the CAT gene greatly reduce the activity of catalase. A shortage of this enzyme can allow hydrogen peroxide to build up to toxic levels in certain cells. For example, hydrogen peroxide produced by bacteria in the mouth may accumulate in and damage soft tissues, leading to mouth ulcers and gangrene. A buildup of hydrogen peroxide may also damage beta cells of the pancreas, which release a hormone called insulin that helps control blood glucose, also called blood sugar. Malfunctioning beta cells are thought to underlie the increased risk of type 2 diabetes in people with acatalasemia. It is unclear why some people have no health problems associated with a loss of catalase activity. Many people with reduced catalase activity do not have an identified mutation in the CAT gene; in these cases, the cause of the condition is unknown. Researchers believe that other genetic and environmental factors can also influence the activity of catalase. Learn more about the gene associated with Acatalasemia CAT Inheritance Acatalasemia has an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance, which means both copies of the CAT gene in each cell have mutations. When both copies of the gene are altered, the activity of catalase is reduced to less than 10 percent of normal. When only one of the two copies of the CAT gene has a mutation, the activity of catalase is reduced by approximately half. This reduction in catalase activity is often called hypocatalasemia. Like acatalasemia, hypocatalasemia usually does not cause any health problems. Other Names for This Condition Acatalasia Catalase deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Acatalasia Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Acatalasemia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM ACATALASEMIA Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Goth L, Eaton JW. Hereditary catalase deficiencies and increased risk of
diabetes. Lancet. 2000 Nov 25;356(9244):1820-1. doi:
10.1016/S0140-6736(00)03238-4. Citation on PubMed Goth L, Nagy T. Acatalasemia and diabetes mellitus. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2012
Sep 15;525(2):195-200. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2012.02.005. Epub 2012 Feb 16. Citation on PubMed Goth L, Nagy T. Inherited catalase deficiency: is it benign or a factor in
various age related disorders? Mutat Res. 2013 Oct-Dec;753(2):147-154. doi:
10.1016/j.mrrev.2013.08.002. Epub 2013 Sep 8. Citation on PubMed Goth L, Rass P, Pay A. Catalase enzyme mutations and their association with
diseases. Mol Diagn. 2004;8(3):141-9. doi: 10.1007/BF03260057. Citation on PubMed Goth L. A new type of inherited catalase deficiencies: its characterization
and comparison to the Japanese and Swiss type of acatalasemia. Blood Cells Mol
Dis. 2001 Mar-Apr;27(2):512-7. doi: 10.1006/bcmd.2001.0415. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Metabolic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Gangrene Genetics Mouth ulcers Type 2 Diabetes Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated September 1, 2014