Van der Woude syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Van der Woude syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/van-der-woude-syndrome/ Van der Woude syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Van der Woude syndrome is a condition that affects the development of the face. Many people with this disorder are born with either a cleft lip or a cleft palate (an opening in the upper lip or roof of the mouth), or both. Affected individuals usually have depressions (pits) near the center of the lower lip, which may appear moist due to the presence of salivary and mucous glands in the pits. Small mounds of tissue on the lower lip may also occur. In some cases, people with van der Woude syndrome have missing teeth. People with van der Woude syndrome who have cleft lip and/or palate, like other individuals with these facial conditions, have an increased risk of delayed language development, learning disabilities, or other mild cognitive problems. The average IQ of individuals with van der Woude syndrome is not significantly different from that of the general population. Frequency Van der Woude syndrome is believed to occur in 1 in 35,000 to 1 in 100,000 people, based on data from Europe, Asia, and Africa. Van der Woude syndrome is the most common cause of cleft lip and palate resulting from genetic variations. Causes Variations (also known as mutations) in the IRF6 gene cause most cases of van der Woude syndrome. The IRF6 gene provides instructions for making a protein that plays an important role in early development. This protein is a transcription factor, which means that it attaches (binds) to specific regions of DNA and helps control the activity of particular genes. The IRF6 protein is active in cells that give rise to tissues in the head and face. It is also involved in the development of other parts of the body, including the skin and genitals. Variants in the IRF6 gene that cause van der Woude syndrome prevent one copy of the gene in each cell from making any functional protein. A shortage of the IRF6 protein affects the development and maturation of tissues in the face, resulting in the signs and symptoms of van der Woude syndrome. In about five percent of cases, van der Woude syndrome is caused by variants in the GRHL3 gene. Learn more about the gene associated with Van der Woude syndrome IRF6 Additional Information from NCBI Gene: GRHL3 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition. Occasionally, an individual who has a copy of the altered gene does not show any signs or symptoms of the disorder. Other Names for This Condition Cleft lip and/or palate with mucous cysts of lower lip Lip-pit syndrome VDWS VWS Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Van der Woude syndrome 1 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Van der Woude syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1; VWS1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Butali A, Mossey PA, Adeyemo WL, Eshete MA, Gaines LA, Even D, Braimah RO,
Aregbesola BS, Rigdon JV, Emeka CI, James O, Ogunlewe MO, Ladeinde AL, Abate F,
Hailu T, Mohammed I, Gravem PE, Deribew M, Gesses M, Adeyemo AA, Murray JC. Novel
IRF6 mutations in families with Van Der Woude syndrome and popliteal pterygium
syndrome from sub-Saharan Africa. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2014 May;2(3):254-60.
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.66. Epub 2014 Jan 27. Citation on PubMed Ghassibe M, Revencu N, Bayet B, Gillerot Y, Vanwijck R, Verellen-Dumoulin C,
Vikkula M. Six families with van der Woude and/or popliteal pterygium syndrome:
all with a mutation in the IRF6 gene. J Med Genet. 2004 Feb;41(2):e15. doi:
10.1136/jmg.2003.009274. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Kondo S, Schutte BC, Richardson RJ, Bjork BC, Knight AS, Watanabe Y, Howard E,
de Lima RL, Daack-Hirsch S, Sander A, McDonald-McGinn DM, Zackai EH, Lammer EJ,
Aylsworth AS, Ardinger HH, Lidral AC, Pober BR, Moreno L, Arcos-Burgos M,
Valencia C, Houdayer C, Bahuau M, Moretti-Ferreira D, Richieri-Costa A, Dixon MJ,
Murray JC. Mutations in IRF6 cause Van der Woude and popliteal pterygium
syndromes. Nat Genet. 2002 Oct;32(2):285-9. doi: 10.1038/ng985. Epub 2002 Sep 3. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Nopoulos P, Richman L, Andreasen N, Murray JC, Schutte B. Cognitive
dysfunction in adults with Van der Woude syndrome. Genet Med. 2007
Apr;9(4):213-8. doi: 10.1097/gim.0b013e3180335abd. Citation on PubMed Nopoulos P, Richman L, Andreasen NC, Murray JC, Schutte B. Abnormal brain
structure in adults with Van der Woude syndrome. Clin Genet. 2007
Jun;71(6):511-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2007.00799.x. Citation on PubMed Rizos M, Spyropoulos MN. Van der Woude syndrome: a review. Cardinal signs,
epidemiology, associated features, differential diagnosis, expressivity, genetic
counselling and treatment. Eur J Orthod. 2004 Feb;26(1):17-24. doi:
10.1093/ejo/26.1.17. Citation on PubMed Schutte BC, Saal HM, Goudy S, Leslie EJ. IRF6-Related Disorders. 2003
Oct 30 [updated 2021 Mar 4]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace
SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA):
University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1407/ Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Cleft Lip and Palate Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated July 7, 2022