VLDLR-associated cerebellar hypoplasia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → VLDLR-associated cerebellar hypoplasia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/vldlr-associated-cerebellar-hypoplasia/ VLDLR-associated cerebellar hypoplasia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description VLDLR -associated cerebellar hypoplasia is an inherited condition that affects the development of the brain. People with this condition have an unusually small and underdeveloped cerebellum, which is the part of the brain that coordinates movement. This brain malformation leads to problems with balance and coordination (ataxia) that become apparent in infancy and remain stable over time. Children with VLDLR -associated cerebellar hypoplasia may learn to walk later in childhood, usually after the age of 6, although some are never able to walk independently. In one Turkish family, affected people walk on their hands and feet (quadrupedal locomotion). Additional features of VLDLR -associated cerebellar hypoplasia include moderate to profound intellectual disability, impaired speech (dysarthria) or a lack of speech, and eyes that do not look in the same direction (strabismus). Some affected individuals have also had flat feet ( pes planus ), seizures, and short stature. Studies suggest that VLDLR -associated cerebellar hypoplasia does not significantly affect a person's life expectancy. Frequency VLDLR -associated cerebellar hypoplasia is rare; its prevalence is unknown. The condition was first described in the Hutterite population in Canada and the United States. This condition has also been reported in families from Iran and Turkey. Causes As its name suggests, VLDLR -associated cerebellar hypoplasia results from mutations in the VLDLR gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called a very low density lipoprotein (VLDL) receptor. Starting before birth, this protein plays a critical role in guiding the movement of developing nerve cells to their appropriate locations in the brain. Mutations in the VLDLR gene prevent cells from producing any functional VLDL receptor protein. Without this protein, developing nerve cells cannot reach the parts of the brain where they are needed. The resulting problems with brain development lead to ataxia and the other major features of this condition. Learn more about the gene associated with VLDLR-associated cerebellar hypoplasia VLDLR Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia with mental retardation Autosomal recessive cerebellar hypoplasia with cerebral gyral simplification Cerebellar disorder, nonprogressive, with mental retardation Cerebellar hypoplasia and mental retardation with or without quadrupedal locomotion Cerebellar hypoplasia, VLDLR-associated CHMRQ1 DES-VLDLR Dysequilibrium syndrome-VLDLR VLDLR-CH VLDLRCH Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Dysequilibrium syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CEREBELLAR ATAXIA, IMPAIRED INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT, AND DYSEQUILIBRIUM SYNDROME 1; CAMRQ1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Boycott KM, Bonnemann C, Herz J, Neuert S, Beaulieu C, Scott JN,
Venkatasubramanian A, Parboosingh JS. Mutations in VLDLR as a cause for autosomal
recessive cerebellar ataxia with mental retardation (dysequilibrium syndrome). J
Child Neurol. 2009 Oct;24(10):1310-5. doi: 10.1177/0883073809332696. Epub 2009
Mar 30. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Boycott KM, Flavelle S, Bureau A, Glass HC, Fujiwara TM, Wirrell E, Davey K,
Chudley AE, Scott JN, McLeod DR, Parboosingh JS. Homozygous deletion of the very
low density lipoprotein receptor gene causes autosomal recessive cerebellar
hypoplasia with cerebral gyral simplification. Am J Hum Genet. 2005
Sep;77(3):477-83. doi: 10.1086/444400. Epub 2005 Jul 22. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Boycott KM, MacDonald SK, Parboosingh JS. VLDLR Cerebellar
Hypoplasia. 2008 Aug 26 [updated 2020 Feb 27]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM,
Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1874/ Citation on PubMed Moheb LA, Tzschach A, Garshasbi M, Kahrizi K, Darvish H, Heshmati Y, Kordi A,
Najmabadi H, Ropers HH, Kuss AW. Identification of a nonsense mutation in the
very low-density lipoprotein receptor gene (VLDLR) in an Iranian family with
dysequilibrium syndrome. Eur J Hum Genet. 2008 Feb;16(2):270-3. doi:
10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201967. Epub 2007 Nov 28. Citation on PubMed Ozcelik T, Akarsu N, Uz E, Caglayan S, Gulsuner S, Onat OE, Tan M, Tan U.
Mutations in the very low-density lipoprotein receptor VLDLR cause cerebellar
hypoplasia and quadrupedal locomotion in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008
Mar 18;105(11):4232-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0710010105. Epub 2008 Mar 7. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Turkmen S, Hoffmann K, Demirhan O, Aruoba D, Humphrey N, Mundlos S. Cerebellar
hypoplasia, with quadrupedal locomotion, caused by mutations in the very
low-density lipoprotein receptor gene. Eur J Hum Genet. 2008 Sep;16(9):1070-4.
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.73. Epub 2008 Mar 26. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Cerebellar Disorders Genetic Disorders Movement Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated October 1, 2009