Cranioectodermal dysplasia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Cranioectodermal dysplasia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/cranioectodermal-dysplasia/ Cranioectodermal dysplasia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Cranioectodermal dysplasia is a disorder that affects many parts of the body. The most common features involve bone abnormalities and abnormal development of certain tissues known as ectodermal tissues, which include the skin, hair, nails, and teeth. The signs and symptoms of this condition vary among affected individuals, even among members of the same family. Distinctive abnormalities of the skull and face are common in people with cranioectodermal dysplasia. Most affected individuals have a prominent forehead ( frontal bossing ) and an elongated head ( dolichocephaly ) due to abnormal fusion of certain skull bones (sagittal craniosynostosis). A variety of facial abnormalities can occur in people with this condition; these include low-set ears that may also be rotated backward , an increased distance between the inner corners of the eyes ( telecanthus ), and outside corners of the eyes that point upward or downward ( upslanting or downslanting palpebral fissures) among others. Development of bones in the rest of the skeleton is also affected in this condition. Abnormalities in the long bones of the arms and legs (metaphyseal dysplasia) lead to short limbs and short stature. In addition, affected individuals often have short fingers ( brachydactyly ). Some people with this condition have short rib bones and a narrow rib cage, which can cause breathing problems, especially in affected newborns. Abnormal development of ectodermal tissues in people with cranioectodermal dysplasia can lead to sparse hair, small or missing teeth, short fingernails and toenails , and loose skin. Cranioectodermal dysplasia can affect additional organs and tissues in the body. A kidney disorder known as nephronophthisis occurs in many people with this condition, and it can lead to a life-threatening failure of kidney function known as end-stage renal disease. Abnormalities of the liver, heart, or eyes also occur in people with cranioectodermal dysplasia. Frequency Cranioectodermal dysplasia is a rare condition with an unknown prevalence. Approximately 40 cases of this condition have been described in the medical literature. Causes Cranioectodermal dysplasia is caused by mutations in one of at least four genes: the WDR35 , IFT122 , WDR19 , or IFT43 gene. The protein produced from each of these genes is one piece (subunit) of a protein complex called IFT complex A (IFT-A). This complex is found in finger-like structures called cilia that stick out from the surface of cells. These structures are important for the development and function of many types of cells and tissues. The IFT-A complex is involved in a process called intraflagellar transport, which moves substances within cilia . This movement is essential for the assembly and maintenance of these structures. The IFT-A complex carries materials from the tip to the base of cilia. Mutations in any of the four mentioned genes reduce the amount or function of one of the IFT-A subunits. Shortage or abnormal function of a single component of the IFT-A complex impairs the function of the entire complex, disrupting the assembly and maintenance of cilia. These mutations lead to a smaller number of cilia and to abnormalities in their shape and structure. Although the mechanism is unclear, a loss of normal cilia impedes proper development of bone, ectodermal tissues, and other tissues and organs, leading to the features of cranioectodermal dysplasia. About 40 percent of people with cranioectodermal dysplasia have mutations in one of the four known genes. The cause of the condition in people without mutations in one of these genes is unknown. Learn more about the genes associated with Cranioectodermal dysplasia IFT122 IFT43 WDR19 WDR35 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition CED Sensenbrenner syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Cranioectodermal dysplasia 1 Genetic Testing Registry: Cranioectodermal dysplasia 2 Genetic Testing Registry: Cranioectodermal dysplasia 3 Genetic Testing Registry: Cranioectodermal dysplasia 4 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Cranioectodermal dysplasia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CRANIOECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA 1; CED1 CRANIOECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA 4; CED4 CRANIOECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA 3; CED3 CRANIOECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA 2; CED2 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Lin AE, Traum AZ, Sahai I, Keppler-Noreuil K, Kukolich MK, Adam MP, Westra SJ,
Arts HH. Sensenbrenner syndrome (Cranioectodermal dysplasia): clinical and
molecular analyses of 39 patients including two new patients. Am J Med Genet A.
2013 Nov;161A(11):2762-76. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36265. Epub 2013 Oct 3. Citation on PubMed Rosenbaum JL, Witman GB. Intraflagellar transport. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2002
Nov;3(11):813-25. doi: 10.1038/nrm952. Citation on PubMed Tan W, Lin A, Keppler-Noreuil K. Cranioectodermal Dysplasia. 2013 Sep 12
[updated 2022 Dec 15]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE,
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University
of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK154653/ Citation on PubMed Taschner M, Bhogaraju S, Lorentzen E. Architecture and function of IFT complex
proteins in ciliogenesis. Differentiation. 2012 Feb;83(2):S12-22. doi:
10.1016/j.diff.2011.11.001. Epub 2011 Nov 25. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Bone Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Ectodermal dysplasia Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated November 1, 2013