Krabbe disease: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Krabbe disease URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/krabbe-disease/ Krabbe disease To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Krabbe disease (also called globoid cell leukodystrophy) is a severe neurological condition. It is part of a group of disorders known as leukodystrophies, which result from the loss of myelin (demyelination) in the nervous system. Myelin is the protective covering around nerve cells that ensures the rapid transmission of nerve signals. Krabbe disease is also characterized by abnormal cells in the brain called globoid cells, which are large cells that usually have more than one nucleus . The most common form of Krabbe disease, called the infantile form, usually begins before the age of 1. Initial signs and symptoms typically include irritability, muscle weakness, feeding difficulties, episodes of fever without any sign of infection, stiff posture, and delayed mental and physical development. As the disease progresses, muscles continue to weaken, affecting the infant's ability to move, chew, swallow, and breathe. Affected infants also experience vision loss and seizures. Because of the severity of the condition, individuals with the infantile form of Krabbe disease rarely survive beyond the age of 2. Less commonly, Krabbe disease begins in childhood, adolescence, or adulthood (late-onset forms). Vision problems and walking difficulties are the most common initial symptoms in these forms of the disorder, however, signs and symptoms vary considerably among affected individuals. Individuals with late-onset Krabbe disease may survive many years after the condition begins. Frequency In the United States, Krabbe disease affects about 1 in 100,000 individuals. A higher incidence (6 cases per 1,000 people) has been reported in a few isolated communities in Israel. Causes Mutations in the GALC gene cause Krabbe disease. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called galactosylceramidase, which breaks down certain fats called galactolipids. One galactolipid broken down by galactosylceramidase, called galactosylceramide, is an important component of myelin. Breakdown of galactosylceramide is part of the normal turnover of myelin that occurs throughout life. Another galactolipid, called psychosine, which is formed during the production of myelin, is toxic if not broken down by galactosylceramidase. GALC gene mutations severely reduce the activity of the galactosylceramidase enzyme. As a result, galactosylceramide and psychosine cannot be broken down. Excess galactosylceramide accumulates in certain cells, forming globoid cells. The accumulation of these galactolipids causes damage to myelin-forming cells, which impairs the formation of myelin and leads to demyelination in the nervous system. Without myelin, nerves in the brain and other parts of the body cannot transmit signals properly, leading to the signs and symptoms of Krabbe disease. Learn more about the gene associated with Krabbe disease GALC Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Diffuse globoid body sclerosis Galactosylceramidase deficiency disease Galactosylceramide lipidosis Galactosylcerebrosidase deficiency Galactosylsphingosine lipidosis GALC deficiency GCL GLD Psychosine lipidosis Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Galactosylceramide beta-galactosidase deficiency Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Krabbe disease Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM KRABBE DISEASE; KRB Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Graziano AC, Cardile V. History, genetic, and recent advances on Krabbe
disease. Gene. 2015 Jan 15;555(1):2-13. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.09.046. Epub
2014 Sep 26. Citation on PubMed National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: Krabbe Disease Sakai N. Pathogenesis of leukodystrophy for Krabbe disease: molecular
mechanism and clinical treatment. Brain Dev. 2009 Aug;31(7):485-7. doi:
10.1016/j.braindev.2009.03.001. Epub 2009 Mar 29. Citation on PubMed Shin D, Feltri ML, Wrabetz L. Altered Trafficking and Processing of GALC
Mutants Correlates with Globoid Cell Leukodystrophy Severity. J Neurosci. 2016
Feb 10;36(6):1858-70. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3095-15.2016. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Spratley SJ, Hill CH, Viuff AH, Edgar JR, Skjodt K, Deane JE. Molecular
Mechanisms of Disease Pathogenesis Differ in Krabbe Disease Variants. Traffic.
2016 Aug;17(8):908-22. doi: 10.1111/tra.12404. Epub 2016 May 30. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Wenger DA, Rafi MA, Luzi P. Krabbe disease: One Hundred years from the bedside
to the bench to the bedside. J Neurosci Res. 2016 Nov;94(11):982-9. doi:
10.1002/jnr.23743. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Leukodystrophies Newborn Screening MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Krabbe disease Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated January 1, 2018