Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/pantothenate-kinase-associated-neurodegeneration/ Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (formerly called Hallervorden-Spatz syndrome) is a disorder of the nervous system.  This condition is characterized by progressive difficulty with movement, typically beginning in childhood.  Movement abnormalities include involuntary muscle spasms, rigidity, and trouble with walking that worsens over time.  Many people with this condition also develop problems with speech (dysarthria), and some develop vision loss. Additionally, affected individuals may experience a loss of intellectual function (dementia) and psychiatric symptoms such as behavioral problems, personality changes, and depression . Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration is characterized by an abnormal buildup of iron in certain areas of the brain. A particular change called the eye-of-the-tiger sign , which indicates an accumulation of iron, is typically seen on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans of the brain in people with this disorder. Researchers have described classic and atypical forms of pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration. The classic form usually appears in early childhood, causing severe problems with movement that worsen rapidly. Features of the atypical form appear later in childhood or adolescence and progress more slowly. Signs and symptoms vary, but the atypical form is more likely than the classic form to involve speech defects and psychiatric problems. A condition called HARP (hypoprebetalipoproteinemia, acanthocytosis, retinitis pigmentosa , and pallidal degeneration) syndrome, which was historically described as a separate syndrome, is now considered part of pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration. Frequency The precise incidence of this condition is unknown.  It is estimated to affect 1 to 3 per million people worldwide. Causes Mutations in the PANK2 gene cause pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration. The PANK2 gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called pantothenate kinase 2. This enzyme is active in mitochondria , the energy-producing centers within cells, where it plays a critical role in the formation of a molecule called coenzyme A. Found in all living cells, coenzyme A is essential for the body's production of energy from carbohydrates, fats, and some protein building blocks (amino acids). Mutations in the PANK2 gene likely result in the production of an abnormal version of pantothenate kinase 2 or prevent cells from making any of this enzyme. A lack of functional pantothenate kinase 2 disrupts the production of coenzyme A and allows potentially harmful compounds to build up in the brain. This buildup leads to swelling and tissue damage, and allows iron to accumulate abnormally in certain parts of the brain. Researchers have not determined how these changes result in the specific features of pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration. Because pantothenate kinase 2 functions in mitochondria, the signs and symptoms of this condition may be related to impaired energy production. Learn more about the gene associated with Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration PANK2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition NBIA1 Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation type 1 PKAN Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Pigmentary pallidal degeneration Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1; NBIA1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Gregory A, Hayflick SJ. Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation. Folia
Neuropathol. 2005;43(4):286-96. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Gregory A, Hayflick SJ. Pantothenate Kinase-Associated Neurodegeneration. 2002
Aug 13 [updated 2017 Aug 3]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace
SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA):
University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1490/ Citation on PubMed Hartig MB, Hortnagel K, Garavaglia B, Zorzi G, Kmiec T, Klopstock T, Rostasy
K, Svetel M, Kostic VS, Schuelke M, Botz E, Weindl A, Novakovic I, Nardocci N,
Prokisch H, Meitinger T. Genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of PANK2 mutations in
patients with neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation. Ann Neurol. 2006
Feb;59(2):248-56. doi: 10.1002/ana.20771. Citation on PubMed Hayflick SJ, Westaway SK, Levinson B, Zhou B, Johnson MA, Ching KH, Gitschier
J. Genetic, clinical, and radiographic delineation of Hallervorden-Spatz
syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2003 Jan 2;348(1):33-40. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa020817. Citation on PubMed Hayflick SJ. Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (formerly
Hallervorden-Spatz syndrome). J Neurol Sci. 2003 Mar 15;207(1-2):106-7. doi:
10.1016/s0022-510x(02)00433-1. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Hayflick SJ. Unraveling the Hallervorden-Spatz syndrome: pantothenate
kinase-associated neurodegeneration is the name. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2003
Dec;15(6):572-7. doi: 10.1097/00008480-200312000-00005. Citation on PubMed Houlden H, Lincoln S, Farrer M, Cleland PG, Hardy J, Orrell RW. Compound
heterozygous PANK2 mutations confirm HARP and Hallervorden-Spatz syndromes are
allelic. Neurology. 2003 Nov 25;61(10):1423-6. doi:
10.1212/01.wnl.0000094120.09977.92. Citation on PubMed Pellecchia MT, Valente EM, Cif L, Salvi S, Albanese A, Scarano V, Bonuccelli
U, Bentivoglio AR, D'Amico A, Marelli C, Di Giorgio A, Coubes P, Barone P,
Dallapiccola B. The diverse phenotype and genotype of pantothenate
kinase-associated neurodegeneration. Neurology. 2005 May 24;64(10):1810-2. doi:
10.1212/01.WNL.0000161843.52641.EC. Citation on PubMed Shevell M. Hallervorden and history. N Engl J Med. 2003 Jan 2;348(1):3-4. doi:
10.1056/NEJMp020158. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Zhou B, Westaway SK, Levinson B, Johnson MA, Gitschier J, Hayflick SJ. A novel
pantothenate kinase gene (PANK2) is defective in Hallervorden-Spatz syndrome. Nat
Genet. 2001 Aug;28(4):345-9. doi: 10.1038/ng572. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Degenerative Nerve Diseases Genetic Disorders Movement Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics MRI Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 29, 2021