Laryngo-onycho-cutaneous syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Laryngo-onycho-cutaneous syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/laryngo-onycho-cutaneous-syndrome/ Laryngo-onycho-cutaneous syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Laryngo-onycho-cutaneous (LOC) syndrome is a disorder that leads to abnormalities of the voicebox (laryngo-), finger- and toenails (onycho-), and skin (cutaneous). Many of the condition's signs and symptoms are related to the abnormal growth of granulation tissue in different parts of the body. This red, bumpy tissue is normally produced during wound healing and is usually replaced by skin cells as healing continues. However, in people with LOC syndrome, this tissue grows even when there is no major injury. One of the first symptoms in infants with LOC syndrome is a hoarse cry due to ulcers or overgrowth of granulation tissue in the voicebox (the larynx). Excess granulation tissue can also block the airways, leading to life-threatening breathing problems; as a result many affected individuals do not survive past childhood. In LOC syndrome, granulation tissue also grows in the eyes, specifically the conjunctiva, which are the moist tissues that line the eyelids and the white part of the eyes. Affected individuals often have impairment or complete loss of vision due to the tissue overgrowth. Another common feature of LOC syndrome is missing patches of skin (cutaneous erosions). The erosions heal slowly and may become infected. People with LOC syndrome can also have malformed nails and small, abnormal teeth. The hard, white material that forms the protective outer layer of each tooth (enamel) is thin, which contributes to frequent cavities. LOC syndrome is typically considered a subtype of another skin condition called junctional epidermolysis bullosa , which is characterized by fragile skin that blisters easily. While individuals with junctional epidermolysis bullosa can have some of the features of LOC syndrome, they do not usually have overgrowth of granulation tissue in the conjunctiva. Frequency LOC syndrome is a rare disorder that primarily affects families of Punjabi background from India and Pakistan, although the condition has also been reported in one family from Iran. Causes LOC syndrome is caused by mutations in the LAMA3 gene, which provides instructions for making one part (subunit) of a protein called laminin 332. This protein is made up of three subunits, called alpha, beta, and gamma. The LAMA3 gene carries instructions for the alpha subunit; the beta and gamma subunits are produced from other genes. The laminin 332 protein plays an important role in strengthening and stabilizing the skin by helping to attach the top layer of skin (the epidermis ) to underlying layers. Studies suggest that laminin 332 is also involved in wound healing. Additionally, researchers have proposed roles for laminin 332 in the clear outer covering of the eye (the cornea) and in the development of tooth enamel. The mutations involved in LOC syndrome alter the structure of one version of the alpha subunit of laminin 332 (called alpha-3a). Laminins made with the altered subunit cannot effectively attach the epidermis to underlying layers of skin or regulate wound healing. These abnormalities of laminin 332 cause the cutaneous erosions and overgrowth of granulation tissue that are characteristic of LOC syndrome. The inability of laminin 332 to perform its other functions leads to the nail and tooth abnormalities that occur in this condition. Learn more about the gene associated with Laryngo-onycho-cutaneous syndrome LAMA3 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition JEB-LOC Laryngoonychocutaneous syndrome LOC syndrome LOCS LOGIC syndrome Shabbir syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Laryngo-onycho-cutaneous syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA, JUNCTIONAL 2C, LARYNGOONYCHOCUTANEOUS; JEB2C Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Barzegar M, Mozafari N, Kariminejad A, Asadikani Z, Ozoemena L, McGrath JA. A
new homozygous nonsense mutation in LAMA3A underlying laryngo-onycho-cutaneous
syndrome. Br J Dermatol. 2013 Dec;169(6):1353-6. doi: 10.1111/bjd.12522. Citation on PubMed Cohn HI, Murrell DF. Laryngo-onycho-cutaneous syndrome. Dermatol Clin. 2010
Jan;28(1):89-92. doi: 10.1016/j.det.2009.10.010. Citation on PubMed McLean WH, Irvine AD, Hamill KJ, Whittock NV, Coleman-Campbell CM, Mellerio
JE, Ashton GS, Dopping-Hepenstal PJ, Eady RA, Jamil T, Phillips R, Shabbir SG,
Haroon TS, Khurshid K, Moore JE, Page B, Darling J, Atherton DJ, Van Steensel MA,
Munro CS, Smith FJ, McGrath JA. An unusual N-terminal deletion of the laminin
alpha3a isoform leads to the chronic granulation tissue disorder
laryngo-onycho-cutaneous syndrome. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Sep 15;12(18):2395-409.
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg234. Epub 2003 Jul 15. Erratum In: Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Feb
1;13(3):365. Phillips Rodney J [corrected to Phillips Roderic J]. Citation on PubMed Phillips RJ, Atherton DJ, Gibbs ML, Strobel S, Lake BD.
Laryngo-onycho-cutaneous syndrome: an inherited epithelial defect. Arch Dis
Child. 1994 Apr;70(4):319-26. doi: 10.1136/adc.70.4.319. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Skin Conditions MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Eye (Image) Genetics How wounds heal Nail abnormalities Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated September 1, 2014