Feingold syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Feingold syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/feingold-syndrome/ Feingold syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Feingold syndrome is a disorder that affects many parts of the body. There are two types of Feingold syndrome, distinguished by their genetic cause; both types have similar features that can vary among affected individuals. Individuals with Feingold syndrome type 1 or type 2 have characteristic abnormalities of their fingers and toes. Almost all people with this condition have a specific hand abnormality called brachymesophalangy, which refers to shortening of the second and fifth fingers. Other common abnormalities include fifth fingers that curve inward ( clinodactyly ), underdeveloped thumbs (thumb hypoplasia), and fusion ( syndactyly ) of the second and third toes or the fourth and fifth toes. Additional common features of both types of Feingold syndrome include an unusually small head size ( microcephaly ), a small jaw ( micrognathia ), a narrow opening of the eyelids ( short palpebral fissures ), and mild to moderate learning disabilities. Less often, affected individuals have hearing loss, short stature, or kidney or heart abnormalities. People with Feingold syndrome type 1 are frequently born with a blockage in part of their digestive system called gastrointestinal atresia. In most cases, the blockage occurs in the esophagus ( esophageal atresia ) or in part of the small intestine (duodenal atresia). Individuals with type 2 do not have gastrointestinal atresias. Frequency Feingold syndrome appears to be a rare condition, although its exact prevalence is unknown. Type 1 is more common than type 2. Causes Mutations in the MYCN gene cause Feingold syndrome type 1, and mutations in chromosome 13 that remove (delete) a region of the chromosome that includes the MIR17HG gene cause type 2. Both genes are involved in growth and development, particularly before birth. The MYCN gene provides instructions for making a protein that regulates the activity (expression) of other genes. The protein attaches (binds) to specific regions of DNA and controls the first step of protein production (transcription). Studies suggest that the MYCN protein is necessary for normal development of the limbs, heart, kidneys, lungs, nervous system, and digestive system. The MIR17HG gene provides instructions for making a set of microRNAs (miRNAs) known as the miR-17~92 cluster. MiRNAs are short pieces of RNA, a chemical cousin of DNA. These molecules control gene expression by blocking protein production. The miRNAs in the miR-17~92 cluster are involved in the development of many tissues and organs in the body. Mutations affecting the MYCN or MIR17HG gene that cause Feingold syndrome prevent one copy of the gene in each cell from producing any functional protein or miRNAs, respectively. As a result, only half the normal amount of the protein or miRNAs is available to control the activity of specific genes during development. It remains unclear how a reduced amount of the MYCN protein or miR-17~92 cluster miRNAs cause the specific features of Feingold syndrome. Learn more about the genes and chromosome associated with Feingold syndrome MIR17HG MYCN chromosome 13 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition Brunner-Winter syndrome Microcephaly-mesobrachyphalangy-tracheoesophageal fistula (MMT) syndrome Microcephaly-oculo-digito-esophageal-duodenal (MODED) syndrome Oculo-digito-esophagoduodental (ODED) syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Feingold syndrome Genetic Testing Registry: Feingold syndrome type 1 Genetic Testing Registry: Feingold syndrome type 2 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Feingold syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM FEINGOLD SYNDROME 1; FGLDS1 FEINGOLD SYNDROME 2; FGLDS2 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Celli J, van Bokhoven H, Brunner HG. Feingold syndrome: clinical review and
genetic mapping. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Nov 1;122A(4):294-300. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.20471. Citation on PubMed de Pontual L, Yao E, Callier P, Faivre L, Drouin V, Cariou S, Van Haeringen A,
Genevieve D, Goldenberg A, Oufadem M, Manouvrier S, Munnich A, Vidigal JA,
Vekemans M, Lyonnet S, Henrion-Caude A, Ventura A, Amiel J. Germline deletion of
the miR-17 approximately 92 cluster causes skeletal and growth defects in humans. Nat Genet.
2011 Sep 4;43(10):1026-30. doi: 10.1038/ng.915. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Grote LE, Repnikova EA, Amudhavalli SM. Expanding the phenotype of feingold
syndrome-2. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Dec;167A(12):3219-25. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.37368. Epub 2015 Sep 11. Citation on PubMed Marcelis CL, Hol FA, Graham GE, Rieu PN, Kellermayer R, Meijer RP, Lugtenberg
D, Scheffer H, van Bokhoven H, Brunner HG, de Brouwer AP. Genotype-phenotype
correlations in MYCN-related Feingold syndrome. Hum Mutat. 2008
Sep;29(9):1125-32. doi: 10.1002/humu.20750. Citation on PubMed Marcelis CLM, de Brouwer APM. Feingold Syndrome 1. 2009 Jun 30 [updated 2019
Apr 4]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A,
editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of
Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK7050/ Citation on PubMed Teszas A, Meijer R, Scheffer H, Gyuris P, Kosztolanyi G, van Bokhoven H,
Kellermayer R. Expanding the clinical spectrum of MYCN-related Feingold syndrome.
Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Oct 15;140(20):2254-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31407. No
abstract available. Citation on PubMed van Bokhoven H, Celli J, van Reeuwijk J, Rinne T, Glaudemans B, van Beusekom
E, Rieu P, Newbury-Ecob RA, Chiang C, Brunner HG. MYCN haploinsufficiency is
associated with reduced brain size and intestinal atresias in Feingold syndrome.
Nat Genet. 2005 May;37(5):465-7. doi: 10.1038/ng1546. Epub 2005 Apr 10. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Foot Injuries and Disorders Genetic Disorders Hand Injuries and Disorders Intestinal Obstruction MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Duodenal atresia Esophageal atresia Genetics Microcephaly Webbing of the fingers or toes Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 1, 2018