Persistent Müllerian duct syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Persistent Müllerian duct syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/persistent-mullerian-duct-syndrome/ Persistent Müllerian duct syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Persistent Müllerian duct syndrome is a disorder of sexual development that affects males. Males with this disorder have normal male reproductive organs , though they also have a uterus and fallopian tubes, which are female reproductive organs . The uterus and fallopian tubes are derived from a structure called the Müllerian duct during development of the fetus. The Müllerian duct usually breaks down during early development in males, but it is retained in those with persistent Müllerian duct syndrome. Affected individuals have the normal chromosomes of a male (46,XY) and normal external male genitalia. The first noted signs and symptoms in males with persistent Müllerian duct syndrome are usually undescended testes (cryptorchidism) or soft out-pouchings in the lower abdomen (inguinal hernias). The uterus and fallopian tubes are typically discovered when surgery is performed to treat these conditions. The testes and female reproductive organs can be located in unusual positions in persistent Müllerian duct syndrome. Occasionally, both testes are undescended (bilateral cryptorchidism) and the uterus is in the pelvis. More often, one testis has descended into the scrotum normally, and one has not. Sometimes, the descended testis pulls the fallopian tube and uterus into the track through which it has descended. This creates a condition called hernia uteri inguinalis, a form of inguinal hernia. In other cases, the undescended testis from the other side of the body is also pulled into the same track, forming an inguinal hernia. This condition, called transverse testicular ectopia, is common in people with persistent Müllerian duct syndrome. Other effects of persistent Müllerian duct syndrome may include the inability to father children (infertility) or blood in the semen (hematospermia). Also, the undescended testes may break down (degenerate) or develop cancer if left untreated. Frequency Persistent Müllerian duct syndrome is a rare disorder; however, the prevalence of the condition is unknown. Causes Most people with persistent Müllerian duct syndrome have mutations in the AMH gene or the AMHR2 gene. The AMH gene provides instructions for making a protein called anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH). The AMHR2 gene provides instructions for making a protein called AMH receptor type 2. The AMH protein and AMH receptor type 2 protein are involved in male sex differentiation. All fetuses develop the Müllerian duct, the precursor to female reproductive organs. During development of a male fetus, these two proteins work together to induce breakdown (regression) of the Müllerian duct. Mutations in the AMH and AMHR2 genes lead to nonfunctional proteins that cannot signal for regression of the Müllerian duct. As a result of these mutations, the Müllerian duct persists and goes on to form a uterus and fallopian tubes. Approximately 45 percent of cases of persistent Müllerian duct syndrome are caused by mutations in the AMH gene and are called persistent Müllerian duct syndrome type 1. Approximately 40 percent of cases are caused by mutations in the AMHR2 gene and are called persistent Müllerian duct syndrome type 2. In the remaining 15 percent of cases, no mutations in the AMH and AMHR2 genes have been identified, and the genes involved in causing the condition are unknown. Learn more about the genes associated with Persistent Müllerian duct syndrome AMH AMHR2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. However, persistent Müllerian duct syndrome affects only males. Females with two mutated copies of the gene do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Persistent oviduct syndrome PMDS Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Persistent Mullerian duct syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Persistent Müllerian duct syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PERSISTENT MULLERIAN DUCT SYNDROME, TYPES I AND II; PMDS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Belville C, Van Vlijmen H, Ehrenfels C, Pepinsky B, Rezaie AR, Picard JY,
Josso N, di Clemente N, Cate RL. Mutations of the anti-mullerian hormone gene in
patients with persistent mullerian duct syndrome: biosynthesis, secretion, and
processing of the abnormal proteins and analysis using a three-dimensional model.
Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Mar;18(3):708-21. doi: 10.1210/me.2003-0358. Epub 2003 Dec
12. Citation on PubMed Faure E, Gouedard L, Imbeaud S, Cate R, Picard JY, Josso N, di Clemente N.
Mutant isoforms of the anti-Mullerian hormone type II receptor are not expressed
at the cell membrane. J Biol Chem. 1996 Nov 29;271(48):30571-5. doi:
10.1074/jbc.271.48.30571. Citation on PubMed Imbeaud S, Belville C, Messika-Zeitoun L, Rey R, di Clemente N, Josso N,
Picard JY. A 27 base-pair deletion of the anti-mullerian type II receptor gene is
the most common cause of the persistent mullerian duct syndrome. Hum Mol Genet.
1996 Sep;5(9):1269-77. doi: 10.1093/hmg/5.9.1269. Citation on PubMed Josso N, Belville C, di Clemente N, Picard JY. AMH and AMH receptor defects in
persistent Mullerian duct syndrome. Hum Reprod Update. 2005 Jul-Aug;11(4):351-6.
doi: 10.1093/humupd/dmi014. Epub 2005 May 5. Citation on PubMed Josso N, Picard JY, Imbeaud S, di Clemente N, Rey R. Clinical aspects and
molecular genetics of the persistent mullerian duct syndrome. Clin Endocrinol
(Oxf). 1997 Aug;47(2):137-44. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2265.1997.2411044.x. No
abstract available. Citation on PubMed Rey R. Anti-Mullerian hormone in disorders of sex determination and
differentiation. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2005 Feb;49(1):26-36. doi:
10.1590/s0004-27302005000100005. Epub 2006 Mar 16. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Differences of sex development Genetics Undescended testicle Undescended testicle repair Related Medical Tests Anti-Müllerian Hormone Test Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 1, 2011