Meckel syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Meckel syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/meckel-syndrome/ Meckel syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Meckel syndrome is a disorder with severe signs and symptoms that affect many parts of the body. The most common features are enlarged kidneys with numerous fluid-filled cysts ; an occipital encephalocele , which is a sac-like protrusion of the brain through an opening at the back of the skull; and the presence of extra fingers and toes ( polydactyly ). Most affected individuals also have a buildup of scar tissue (fibrosis) in the liver. Other signs and symptoms of Meckel syndrome vary widely among affected individuals. Numerous abnormalities of the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system) have been reported in people with Meckel syndrome, including a group of birth defects known as neural tube defects. These defects occur when a structure called the neural tube, a layer of cells that ultimately develops into the brain and spinal cord, fails to close completely during the first few weeks of embryonic development. Meckel syndrome can also cause problems with development of the eyes and other facial features, heart, bones, urinary system, and genitalia. Because of their serious health problems, most individuals with Meckel syndrome die before or shortly after birth. Most often, affected infants die of respiratory problems or kidney failure. Frequency Meckel syndrome affects 1 in 13,250 to 1 in 140,000 people worldwide. It is more common in certain populations; for example, the condition affects about 1 in 9,000 people of Finnish ancestry and about 1 in 3,000 people of Belgian ancestry. Causes Meckel syndrome can be caused by mutations in one of at least eight genes. The proteins produced from these genes are known or suspected to play roles in cell structures called cilia. Cilia are microscopic, finger-like projections that stick out from the surface of cells and are involved in signaling pathways that transmit information between cells. Cilia are important for the structure and function of many types of cells, including brain cells and certain cells in the kidneys and liver. Mutations in the genes associated with Meckel syndrome lead to problems with the structure and function of cilia. Defects in these cell structures probably disrupt important chemical signaling pathways during early development. Although researchers believe that defective cilia are responsible for most of the features of this disorder, it remains unclear how they lead to specific developmental abnormalities of the brain, kidneys, and other parts of the body. Mutations in the eight genes known to be associated with Meckel syndrome account for about 75 percent of all cases of the condition. In the remaining cases, the genetic cause is unknown. Mutations in several other genes have been identified in people with features similar to those of Meckel syndrome, although it is unclear whether these individuals actually have Meckel syndrome or a related disorder (often described as a "Meckel-like phenotype"). Learn more about the gene associated with Meckel syndrome CEP290 Additional Information from NCBI Gene: B9D1 B9D2 CC2D2A MKS1 RPGRIP1L TMEM216 TMEM67 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Dysencephalia splanchnocystica Meckel-Gruber syndrome MKS Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Meckel syndrome, type 1 Genetic Testing Registry: Meckel syndrome, type 6 Genetic Testing Registry: Meckel syndrome, type 8 Genetic Testing Registry: NPHP3-related Meckel-like syndrome Genetic Testing Registry: Meckel syndrome, type 10 Genetic Testing Registry: Meckel syndrome, type 2 Genetic Testing Registry: Meckel syndrome, type 3 Genetic Testing Registry: Meckel syndrome, type 4 Genetic Testing Registry: Meckel syndrome, type 5 Genetic Testing Registry: Meckel syndrome, type 9 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Meckel syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 7; MKS7 MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 1; MKS1 MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 2; MKS2 MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 3; MKS3 MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 4; MKS4 MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 6; MKS6 MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 5; MKS5 MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 9; MKS9 MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 8; MKS8 MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 10; MKS10 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Logan CV, Abdel-Hamed Z, Johnson CA. Molecular genetics and pathogenic
mechanisms for the severe ciliopathies: insights into neurodevelopment and
pathogenesis of neural tube defects. Mol Neurobiol. 2011 Feb;43(1):12-26. doi:
10.1007/s12035-010-8154-0. Epub 2010 Nov 27. Citation on PubMed Salonen R, Kestila M, Bergmann C. Clinical utility gene card for: Meckel
syndrome. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Jul;19(7). doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.255. Epub 2011
Feb 2. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Salonen R, Paavola P. Meckel syndrome. J Med Genet. 1998 Jun;35(6):497-501.
doi: 10.1136/jmg.35.6.497. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Tallila J, Salonen R, Kohlschmidt N, Peltonen L, Kestila M. Mutation spectrum
of Meckel syndrome genes: one group of syndromes or several distinct groups? Hum
Mutat. 2009 Aug;30(8):E813-30. doi: 10.1002/humu.21057. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Brain Malformations Genetic Disorders Kidney Cysts Neural Tube Defects MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated May 1, 2012