IMAGe syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → IMAGe syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/image-syndrome/ IMAGe syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description The combination of intrauterine growth restriction, metaphyseal dysplasia, adrenal hypoplasia congenita, and genital anomalies is commonly known by the acronym IMAGe. This rare syndrome has signs and symptoms that affect many parts of the body. Most affected individuals grow slowly before birth (intrauterine growth restriction) and are small in infancy. They have skeletal abnormalities that often become apparent in early childhood, although these abnormalities are usually mild and can be difficult to recognize on x-rays. The most common bone changes are metaphyseal dysplasia and epiphyseal dysplasia; these are malformations of the ends of long bones in the arms and legs. Some affected individuals also have an abnormal side-to-side curvature of the spine ( scoliosis ) or thinning of the bones ( osteoporosis ). Adrenal hypoplasia congenita is the most severe feature of IMAGe syndrome. The adrenal glands are a pair of small glands on top of each kidney. They produce a variety of hormones that regulate many essential functions in the body. Underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of these glands prevents them from producing enough hormones, a condition known as adrenal insufficiency. The signs of adrenal insufficiency begin shortly after birth and include vomiting, difficulty with feeding, dehydration, extremely low blood glucose (hypoglycemia), and shock. If untreated, these complications can be life-threatening. The genital abnormalities associated with IMAGe syndrome occur only in affected males. They include an unusually small penis (micropenis), undescended testes (cryptorchidism), and the opening of the urethra on the underside of the penis (hypospadias). Several additional signs and symptoms have been reported in people with IMAGe syndrome. Some affected individuals have distinctive facial features, such as a prominent forehead , low-set ears, and a short nose with a flat nasal bridge . Less commonly, people with this condition have premature fusion of certain bones of the skull (craniosynostosis), a split in the soft flap of tissue that hangs from the back of the mouth ( cleft or bifid uvula ), a high-arched roof of the mouth (palate) , and a small chin ( micrognathia ). Other possible features of IMAGe syndrome include high levels of calcium in the blood (hypercalcemia) or urine (hypercalcuria) and a shortage of growth hormone in childhood that results in short stature. Frequency IMAGe syndrome is very rare, with only about 20 cases reported in the medical literature. The condition has been diagnosed more often in males than in females, probably because females do not have associated genital abnormalities. Causes IMAGe syndrome is caused by mutations in the CDKN1C gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that helps control growth before birth. The mutations that cause IMAGe syndrome alter the structure and function of the CDKN1C protein, which inhibits normal growth starting in the early stages of development before birth. Researchers are working to determine how these genetic changes underlie the bone abnormalities, adrenal gland underdevelopment, and other signs and symptoms of this condition. People inherit one copy of most genes from their mother and one copy from their father. For most genes, both copies are fully turned on (active) in cells. The CDKN1C gene, however, is most active when it is inherited from a person's mother. The copy of CDKN1C inherited from a person's father is active at much lower levels in most tissues. This sort of parent-specific difference in gene activation is caused by a phenomenon called genomic imprinting. When genomic imprinting reduces the activity of the copy of a gene inherited from the father, that gene is said to be paternally imprinted. Learn more about the gene associated with IMAGe syndrome CDKN1C Inheritance The inheritance of IMAGe syndrome is complex. The condition is described as having an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern because one copy of the altered CDKN1C gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. However, because this gene is paternally imprinted, IMAGe syndrome results only when the mutation is present on the maternally inherited copy of the gene. When a mutation affects the paternally inherited copy of the CDKN1C gene, it does not cause health problems. Therefore, IMAGe syndrome is passed only from mothers to their children. Other Names for This Condition IMAGe anomaly IMAGe association IMAGe syndrome Intrauterine growth restriction, metaphyseal dysplasia, adrenal hypoplasia congenita, and genital anomalies Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: IMAGe syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center IMAGe syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM INTRAUTERINE GROWTH RETARDATION, METAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, ADRENAL HYPOPLASIA CONGENITA, AND GENITAL ANOMALIES; IMAGE Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Arboleda VA, Lee H, Parnaik R, Fleming A, Banerjee A, Ferraz-de-Souza B, Delot
EC, Rodriguez-Fernandez IA, Braslavsky D, Bergada I, Dell'Angelica EC, Nelson SF,
Martinez-Agosto JA, Achermann JC, Vilain E. Mutations in the PCNA-binding domain
of CDKN1C cause IMAGe syndrome. Nat Genet. 2012 May 27;44(7):788-92. doi:
10.1038/ng.2275. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Balasubramanian M, Sprigg A, Johnson DS. IMAGe syndrome: Case report with a
previously unreported feature and review of published literature. Am J Med Genet
A. 2010 Dec;152A(12):3138-42. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33716. Citation on PubMed Bergada I, Del Rey G, Lapunzina P, Bergada C, Fellous M, Copelli S. Familial
occurrence of the IMAGe association: additional clinical variants and a proposed
mode of inheritance. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Jun;90(6):3186-90. doi:
10.1210/jc.2004-1589. Epub 2005 Mar 15. Citation on PubMed Lienhardt A, Mas JC, Kalifa G, Chaussain JL, Tauber M. IMAGe association:
additional clinical features and evidence for recessive autosomal inheritance.
Horm Res. 2002;57 Suppl 2:71-8. doi: 10.1159/000058105. Citation on PubMed Pedreira CC, Savarirayan R, Zacharin MR. IMAGe syndrome: a complex disorder
affecting growth, adrenal and gonadal function, and skeletal development. J
Pediatr. 2004 Feb;144(2):274-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2003.09.052. Citation on PubMed Tan TY, Jameson JL, Campbell PE, Ekert PG, Zacharin M, Savarirayan R. Two
sisters with IMAGe syndrome: cytomegalic adrenal histopathology, support for
autosomal recessive inheritance and literature review. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Aug
15;140(16):1778-84. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31365. Citation on PubMed Vilain E, Le Merrer M, Lecointre C, Desangles F, Kay MA, Maroteaux P, McCabe
ER. IMAGe, a new clinical association of intrauterine growth retardation,
metaphyseal dysplasia, adrenal hypoplasia congenita, and genital anomalies. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1999 Dec;84(12):4335-40. doi: 10.1210/jcem.84.12.6186. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Adrenal Gland Disorders Bone Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Adrenal glands Genetics Hypospadias (Image) Intrauterine growth restriction Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated April 1, 2013