CHST3-related skeletal dysplasia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → CHST3-related skeletal dysplasia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/chst3-related-skeletal-dysplasia/ CHST3-related skeletal dysplasia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description CHST3 -related skeletal dysplasia is a genetic condition characterized by bone and joint abnormalities that worsen over time. Affected individuals have short stature throughout life, with an adult height under 4 and a half feet. Joint dislocations, most often affecting the knees, hips, and elbows, are present at birth (congenital). Other bone and joint abnormalities can include an inward- and upward-turning foot ( clubfoot ), a limited range of motion in large joints, and abnormal curvature of the spine . The features of CHST3 -related skeletal dysplasia are usually limited to the bones and joints; however, minor heart defects have been reported in a few affected individuals. Researchers have not settled on a preferred name for this condition. It is sometimes known as autosomal recessive Larsen syndrome based on its similarity to another skeletal disorder called Larsen syndrome. Other names that have been used to describe the condition include spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, Omani type; humero-spinal dysostosis; and chondrodysplasia with multiple dislocations. Recently, researchers have proposed the umbrella term CHST3 -related skeletal dysplasia to refer to bone and joint abnormalities resulting from mutations in the CHST3 gene. Frequency The prevalence of CHST3 -related skeletal dysplasia is unknown. More than 30 affected individuals have been reported. Causes As its name suggests, CHST3 -related skeletal dysplasia results from mutations in the CHST3 gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called C6ST-1, which is essential for the normal development of cartilage. Cartilage is a tough, flexible tissue that makes up much of the skeleton during early development. Most cartilage is later converted to bone, except for the cartilage that continues to cover and protect the ends of bones and is present in the nose and external ears. Mutations in the CHST3 gene reduce or eliminate the activity of the C6ST-1 enzyme. A shortage of this enzyme disrupts the normal development of cartilage and bone, resulting in the abnormalities associated with CHST3 -related skeletal dysplasia. Learn more about the gene associated with CHST3-related skeletal dysplasia CHST3 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Autosomal recessive Larsen syndrome CDMD Chondrodysplasia with multiple dislocations Humero-spinal dysostosis SED with luxations, CHST3 type SED, Omani type Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with congenital joint dislocations Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, Omani type Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Larsen-like syndrome, B3GAT3 type Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center CHST3-related skeletal dysplasia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA WITH CONGENITAL JOINT DISLOCATIONS; SEDCJD Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Hermanns P, Unger S, Rossi A, Perez-Aytes A, Cortina H, Bonafe L, Boccone L,
Setzu V, Dutoit M, Sangiorgi L, Pecora F, Reicherter K, Nishimura G, Spranger J,
Zabel B, Superti-Furga A. Congenital joint dislocations caused by carbohydrate
sulfotransferase 3 deficiency in recessive Larsen syndrome and humero-spinal
dysostosis. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Jun;82(6):1368-74. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.05.006. Erratum In: Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Aug;83(2):293. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Rajab A, Kunze J, Mundlos S. Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia Omani type: a new
recessive type of SED with progressive spinal involvement. Am J Med Genet A. 2004
May 1;126A(4):413-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20606. Citation on PubMed Superti-Furga A, Unger S. Chondrodysplasia with Congenital Joint Dislocations,
CHST3-Related. 2011 Sep 1 [updated 2024 Aug 1]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J,
Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R)
[Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available
from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK62112/ Citation on PubMed Thiele H, Sakano M, Kitagawa H, Sugahara K, Rajab A, Hohne W, Ritter H,
Leschik G, Nurnberg P, Mundlos S. Loss of chondroitin 6-O-sulfotransferase-1
function results in severe human chondrodysplasia with progressive spinal
involvement. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Jul 6;101(27):10155-60. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0400334101. Epub 2004 Jun 23. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Tuysuz B, Mizumoto S, Sugahara K, Celebi A, Mundlos S, Turkmen S. Omani-type
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with cardiac involvement caused by a missense
mutation in CHST3. Clin Genet. 2009 Apr;75(4):375-83. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-0004.2009.01167.x. Citation on PubMed Unger S, Lausch E, Rossi A, Megarbane A, Sillence D, Alcausin M, Aytes A,
Mendoza-Londono R, Nampoothiri S, Afroze B, Hall B, Lo IF, Lam ST, Hoefele J,
Rost I, Wakeling E, Mangold E, Godbole K, Vatanavicharn N, Franco LM, Chandler K,
Hollander S, Velten T, Reicherter K, Spranger J, Robertson S, Bonafe L, Zabel B,
Superti-Furga A. Phenotypic features of carbohydrate sulfotransferase 3 (CHST3)
deficiency in 24 patients: congenital dislocations and vertebral changes as
principal diagnostic features. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Oct;152A(10):2543-9. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.33641. Citation on PubMed van Roij MH, Mizumoto S, Yamada S, Morgan T, Tan-Sindhunata MB,
Meijers-Heijboer H, Verbeke JI, Markie D, Sugahara K, Robertson SP.
Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, Omani type: further definition of the phenotype. Am
J Med Genet A. 2008 Sep 15;146A(18):2376-84. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32482. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Bone Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Clubfoot Dislocation Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated October 1, 2012