COL4A1-related brain small-vessel disease: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → COL4A1-related brain small-vessel disease URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/col4a1-related-brain-small-vessel-disease/ COL4A1-related brain small-vessel disease To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description COL4A1 -related brain small-vessel disease is part of a group of conditions called the COL4A1 -related disorders. The conditions in this group have a range of signs and symptoms that involve fragile blood vessels . COL4A1 -related brain small-vessel disease is characterized by weakening of the blood vessels in the brain. Stroke is often the first symptom of this condition, typically occurring in mid-adulthood. In affected individuals, stroke is usually caused by bleeding in the brain ( hemorrhagic stroke ) rather than a lack of blood flow in the brain ( ischemic stroke ), although either type can occur. Individuals with this condition are at increased risk of having more than one stroke in their lifetime. People with COL4A1 -related brain small vessel disease also have leukoencephalopathy, which is a change in a type of brain tissue called white matter that can be seen with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Affected individuals may also experience seizures and migraine headaches accompanied by visual sensations known as auras. Some people with COL4A1 -related brain small-vessel disease have an eye abnormality called Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly. Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly involves underdevelopment and eventual tearing of the colored part of the eye (iris) and a pupil that is not in the center of the eye. Other eye problems experienced by people with COL4A1 -related brain small-vessel disease include clouding of the lens of the eye ( cataract ) and the presence of arteries that twist and turn abnormally within the light-sensitive tissue at the back of the eye (arterial retinal tortuosity). Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly and cataract can cause impaired vision. Arterial retinal tortuosity can cause episodes of bleeding within the eye following any minor trauma to the eye, leading to temporary vision loss. The severity of the condition varies greatly among affected individuals. Some individuals with COL4A1 -related brain small-vessel disease do not have any signs or symptoms of the condition. Frequency COL4A1 -related brain small-vessel disease is a rare condition, although the exact prevalence is unknown. At least 50 individuals with this condition have been described in the scientific literature. Causes As the name suggests, mutations in the COL4A1 gene cause COL4A1 -related brain small vessel disease. The COL4A1 gene provides instructions for making one component of a protein called type IV collagen. Type IV collagen molecules attach to each other to form complex protein networks. These protein networks are the main components of basement membranes, which are thin sheet-like structures that separate and support cells in many tissues. Type IV collagen networks play an important role in the basement membranes in virtually all tissues throughout the body, particularly the basement membranes surrounding the body's blood vessels (vasculature). The COL4A1 gene mutations that cause COL4A1 -related brain small-vessel disease result in the production of a protein that disrupts the structure of type IV collagen. As a result, type IV collagen molecules cannot attach to each other to form the protein networks in basement membranes. Basement membranes without these networks are unstable, leading to weakening of the tissues that they surround. In people with COL4A1 -related brain small-vessel disease, the vasculature in the brain weakens, which can lead to blood vessel breakage and stroke . Similar blood vessel weakness and breakage occurs in the eyes of some affected individuals. Learn more about the gene associated with COL4A1-related brain small-vessel disease COL4A1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition . Rarely, new mutations in the gene occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Other Names for This Condition Brain small-vessel disease with hemorrhage Additional Information & Resources Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM BRAIN SMALL VESSEL DISEASE 1 WITH OR WITHOUT OCULAR ANOMALIES; BSVD1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Lanfranconi S, Markus HS. COL4A1 mutations as a monogenic cause of cerebral
small vessel disease: a systematic review. Stroke. 2010 Aug;41(8):e513-8. doi:
10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.581918. Epub 2010 Jun 17. Citation on PubMed Sibon I, Coupry I, Menegon P, Bouchet JP, Gorry P, Burgelin I, Calvas P,
Orignac I, Dousset V, Lacombe D, Orgogozo JM, Arveiler B, Goizet C. COL4A1
mutation in Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly with leukoencephalopathy and stroke. Ann
Neurol. 2007 Aug;62(2):177-84. doi: 10.1002/ana.21191. Citation on PubMed Vahedi K, Alamowitch S. Clinical spectrum of type IV collagen (COL4A1)
mutations: a novel genetic multisystem disease. Curr Opin Neurol. 2011
Feb;24(1):63-8. doi: 10.1097/WCO.0b013e32834232c6. Citation on PubMed Volonghi I, Pezzini A, Del Zotto E, Giossi A, Costa P, Ferrari D, Padovani A.
Role of COL4A1 in basement-membrane integrity and cerebral small-vessel disease.
The COL4A1 stroke syndrome. Curr Med Chem. 2010;17(13):1317-24. doi:
10.2174/092986710790936293. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Brain Diseases Eye Diseases Genetic Disorders Hemorrhagic Stroke Migraine MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated September 1, 2011