Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2 URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/pseudohypoaldosteronism-type-2/ Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2 (PHA2) is caused by problems that affect regulation of the amount of sodium and potassium in the body. Sodium and potassium are important in the control of blood pressure, and their regulation occurs primarily in the kidneys. People with PHA2 have high blood pressure ( hypertension ) and high levels of potassium in their blood (hyperkalemia) despite having normal kidney function. The age of onset of PHA2 is variable and difficult to pinpoint; some affected individuals are diagnosed in infancy or childhood, and others are diagnosed in adulthood. Hyperkalemia usually occurs first, and hypertension develops later in life. Affected individuals also have high levels of chloride (hyperchloremia) and acid (metabolic acidosis) in their blood (together, referred to as hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis). People with hyperkalemia, hyperchloremia, and metabolic acidosis can have nonspecific symptoms like nausea, vomiting, extreme tiredness (fatigue), and muscle weakness. People with PHA2 may also have high levels of calcium in their urine (hypercalciuria). Frequency PHA2 is a rare condition; however, the prevalence is unknown. Causes PHA2 can be caused by mutations in the WNK1 , WNK4 , CUL3 , or KLHL3 gene. These genes play a role in the regulation of blood pressure. The proteins produced from the WNK1 and WNK4 genes help control the amount of sodium and potassium in the body by regulating channels in the cell membrane that control the transport of sodium or potassium into and out of cells. This process primarily occurs in the kidneys. Mutations in either of these genes disrupt control of these channels, leading to abnormal levels of sodium and potassium in the body. As a result, affected individuals develop hypertension and hyperkalemia. The proteins produced from the CUL3 gene (called cullin-3) and the KLHL3 gene help control the amount of WNK1 and WNK4 protein available. Cullin-3 and KLHL3 are two pieces of a complex, called an E3 ubiquitin ligase, that tags certain other proteins with molecules called ubiquitin. This molecule acts as a signal for the tagged protein to be broken down when it is no longer needed. E3 ubiquitin ligases containing cullin-3 and KLHL3 are able to tag the WNK1 and WNK4 proteins with ubiquitin, leading to their breakdown. Mutations in either the CUL3 or KLHL3 gene impair breakdown of the WNK4 protein. (The effect of these mutations on the WNK1 protein is unclear.) An excess of WNK4 likely disrupts control of sodium and potassium levels, resulting in hypertension and hyperkalemia. Learn more about the genes associated with Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2 CUL3 KLHL3 WNK1 WNK4 Inheritance This condition is usually inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases caused by mutations in the WNK1 , WNK4 , or KLHL3 gene, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent . While some cases caused by CUL3 gene mutations can be inherited from an affected parent, many result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Some cases caused by mutations in the KLHL3 gene are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Familial hyperkalemic hypertension Familial hyperpotassemia and hypertension Familial hypertensive hyperkalemia FHHt Gordon hyperkalemia-hypertension syndrome Gordon's syndrome PHAII Pseudohypoaldosteronism type II Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2A Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2 Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE IIA; PHA2A PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE IIB; PHA2B PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE IIC; PHA2C PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE IID; PHA2D PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE IIE; PHA2E Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Boyden LM, Choi M, Choate KA, Nelson-Williams CJ, Farhi A, Toka HR, Tikhonova
IR, Bjornson R, Mane SM, Colussi G, Lebel M, Gordon RD, Semmekrot BA, Poujol A,
Valimaki MJ, De Ferrari ME, Sanjad SA, Gutkin M, Karet FE, Tucci JR, Stockigt JR,
Keppler-Noreuil KM, Porter CC, Anand SK, Whiteford ML, Davis ID, Dewar SB,
Bettinelli A, Fadrowski JJ, Belsha CW, Hunley TE, Nelson RD, Trachtman H, Cole
TR, Pinsk M, Bockenhauer D, Shenoy M, Vaidyanathan P, Foreman JW, Rasoulpour M,
Thameem F, Al-Shahrouri HZ, Radhakrishnan J, Gharavi AG, Goilav B, Lifton RP.
Mutations in kelch-like 3 and cullin 3 cause hypertension and electrolyte
abnormalities. Nature. 2012 Jan 22;482(7383):98-102. doi: 10.1038/nature10814. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Chavez-Canales M, Zhang C, Soukaseum C, Moreno E, Pacheco-Alvarez D,
Vidal-Petiot E, Castaneda-Bueno M, Vazquez N, Rojas-Vega L, Meermeier NP, Rogers
S, Jeunemaitre X, Yang CL, Ellison DH, Gamba G, Hadchouel J. WNK-SPAK-NCC cascade
revisited: WNK1 stimulates the activity of the Na-Cl cotransporter via SPAK, an
effect antagonized by WNK4. Hypertension. 2014 Nov;64(5):1047-53. doi:
10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.114.04036. Epub 2014 Aug 11. Citation on PubMed Louis-Dit-Picard H, Barc J, Trujillano D, Miserey-Lenkei S, Bouatia-Naji N,
Pylypenko O, Beaurain G, Bonnefond A, Sand O, Simian C, Vidal-Petiot E, Soukaseum
C, Mandet C, Broux F, Chabre O, Delahousse M, Esnault V, Fiquet B, Houillier P,
Bagnis CI, Koenig J, Konrad M, Landais P, Mourani C, Niaudet P, Probst V, Thauvin
C, Unwin RJ, Soroka SD, Ehret G, Ossowski S, Caulfield M; International
Consortium for Blood Pressure (ICBP); Bruneval P, Estivill X, Froguel P,
Hadchouel J, Schott JJ, Jeunemaitre X. KLHL3 mutations cause familial
hyperkalemic hypertension by impairing ion transport in the distal nephron. Nat
Genet. 2012 Mar 11;44(4):456-60, S1-3. doi: 10.1038/ng.2218. Erratum In: Nat
Genet. 2012;44(5):609. Citation on PubMed McCormick JA, Ellison DH. The WNKs: atypical protein kinases with pleiotropic
actions. Physiol Rev. 2011 Jan;91(1):177-219. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00017.2010. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Ohta A, Schumacher FR, Mehellou Y, Johnson C, Knebel A, Macartney TJ, Wood NT,
Alessi DR, Kurz T. The CUL3-KLHL3 E3 ligase complex mutated in Gordon's
hypertension syndrome interacts with and ubiquitylates WNK isoforms:
disease-causing mutations in KLHL3 and WNK4 disrupt interaction. Biochem J. 2013
Apr 1;451(1):111-22. doi: 10.1042/BJ20121903. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Vidal-Petiot E, Elvira-Matelot E, Mutig K, Soukaseum C, Baudrie V, Wu S,
Cheval L, Huc E, Cambillau M, Bachmann S, Doucet A, Jeunemaitre X, Hadchouel J.
WNK1-related Familial Hyperkalemic Hypertension results from an increased
expression of L-WNK1 specifically in the distal nephron. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A. 2013 Aug 27;110(35):14366-71. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1304230110. Epub 2013 Aug 12. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Wilson FH, Disse-Nicodeme S, Choate KA, Ishikawa K, Nelson-Williams C,
Desitter I, Gunel M, Milford DV, Lipkin GW, Achard JM, Feely MP, Dussol B,
Berland Y, Unwin RJ, Mayan H, Simon DB, Farfel Z, Jeunemaitre X, Lifton RP. Human
hypertension caused by mutations in WNK kinases. Science. 2001 Aug
10;293(5532):1107-12. doi: 10.1126/science.1062844. Citation on PubMed Wilson FH, Kahle KT, Sabath E, Lalioti MD, Rapson AK, Hoover RS, Hebert SC,
Gamba G, Lifton RP. Molecular pathogenesis of inherited hypertension with
hyperkalemia: the Na-Cl cotransporter is inhibited by wild-type but not mutant
WNK4. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Jan 21;100(2):680-4. doi:
10.1073/pnas.242735399. Epub 2003 Jan 6. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders High Blood Pressure MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics High potassium level Metabolic acidosis Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 1, 2016