Neurofibromatosis type 2: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Neurofibromatosis type 2 URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/neurofibromatosis-type-2/ Neurofibromatosis type 2 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Neurofibromatosis type 2 is a disorder characterized by the growth of noncancerous tumors in the nervous system. The most common tumors associated with neurofibromatosis type 2 are called vestibular schwannomas. These growths develop along the nerve that carries information from the inner ear to the brain (the auditory nerve). Tumors that form on the membrane that covers the brain and spinal cord (meninges) are also common in neurofibromatosis type 2. These tumors are called meningiomas. Tumors can also occur on other nerves or tissues in the brain or spinal cord in people with this condition. The signs and symptoms of neurofibromatosis type 2 usually appear during adolescence or in a person's early twenties, although they can begin at any age. The most frequent early symptoms of vestibular schwannomas are hearing loss, ringing in the ears (tinnitus), and problems with balance. Less commonly, vestibular schwannomas cause facial weakness or paralysis. In most cases, these tumors occur in both ears (bilaterally) by age 30. If tumors develop elsewhere in the nervous system, signs and symptoms vary according to their location. Complications of tumor growth can include changes in vision, numbness or weakness in the arms or legs, and fluid buildup in the brain. Some people with neurofibromatosis type 2 also develop clouding of the lens ( cataracts ) in one or both eyes, often beginning in childhood. Frequency Neurofibromatosis type 2 has an estimated incidence of 1 in 33,000 people worldwide. Causes Variants (also known as mutations) in the NF2 gene cause neurofibromatosis type 2. The NF2 gene provides instructions for making a protein called merlin (also known as schwannomin). This protein is produced in the nervous system, particularly in Schwann cells, which surround and insulate nerve cells (neurons) in the brain and spinal cord. Merlin acts as a tumor suppressor, which means that it keeps cells from growing and dividing too rapidly or in an uncontrolled way. Although its exact function is unknown, this protein is likely also involved in controlling cell movement, cell shape, and communication between cells.  Variants in the NF2 gene lead to the production of a nonfunctional version of the merlin protein that cannot regulate the growth and division of cells. Research suggests that the loss of merlin allows cells, especially Schwann cells, to multiply too frequently and form the tumors characteristic of neurofibromatosis type 2. Learn more about the gene associated with Neurofibromatosis type 2 NF2 Inheritance Neurofibromatosis type 2 is considered to have an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. People with this condition are born with one altered copy of the NF2 gene in each cell. In about half of cases, the altered gene is inherited from an affected parent . The remaining cases result from new variants in the NF2 gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Unlike most other autosomal dominant conditions, in which one altered copy of a gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder, two copies of the NF2 gene must be altered to trigger tumor formation in neurofibromatosis type 2. A variant in the second copy of the NF2 gene occurs in Schwann cells or other cells in the nervous system during a person's lifetime. Almost everyone who is born with one NF2 variant acquires a second variant (known as a somatic variant) in these cells and develops the tumors characteristic of neurofibromatosis type 2. Other Names for This Condition BANF Bilateral acoustic neurofibromatosis Central neurofibromatosis Familial acoustic neuromas Neurofibromatosis 2 Neurofibromatosis type 2 merlin Neurofibromatosis type II NF2 Schwannoma, acoustic, bilateral Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Neurofibromatosis, type 2 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Neurofibromatosis type 2 Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM SCHWANNOMATOSIS, VESTIBULAR; SWNV Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Asthagiri AR, Parry DM, Butman JA, Kim HJ, Tsilou ET, Zhuang Z, Lonser RR.
Neurofibromatosis type 2. Lancet. 2009 Jun 6;373(9679):1974-86. doi:
10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60259-2. Epub 2009 May 22. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Evans DG, Howard E, Giblin C, Clancy T, Spencer H, Huson SM, Lalloo F. Birth
incidence and prevalence of tumor-prone syndromes: estimates from a UK family
genetic register service. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Feb;152A(2):327-32. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.33139. Citation on PubMed Evans DG. Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2): a clinical and molecular review.
Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2009 Jun 19;4:16. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-4-16. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Evans DG. NF2-Related Schwannomatosis. 1998 Oct 14 [updated 2023 Apr
20]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington,
Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1201/ Citation on PubMed Evans GR, Lloyd SKW, Ramsden RT. Neurofibromatosis type 2. Adv
Otorhinolaryngol. 2011;70:91-98. doi: 10.1159/000322482. Epub 2011 Feb 24. Citation on PubMed Hoa M, Slattery WH 3rd. Neurofibromatosis 2. Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2012
Apr;45(2):315-32, viii. doi: 10.1016/j.otc.2011.12.005. Citation on PubMed Ruggieri M, Iannetti P, Polizzi A, La Mantia I, Spalice A, Giliberto O,
Platania N, Gabriele AL, Albanese V, Pavone L. Earliest clinical manifestations
and natural history of neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) in childhood: a study of 24
patients. Neuropediatrics. 2005 Feb;36(1):21-34. doi: 10.1055/s-2005-837581. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Acoustic Neuroma Genetic Disorders Neurofibromatosis MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Acoustic neuroma Genetics Neurofibromatosis 2 Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated July 27, 2022