Juvenile primary lateral sclerosis: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Juvenile primary lateral sclerosis URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/juvenile-primary-lateral-sclerosis/ Juvenile primary lateral sclerosis To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Juvenile primary lateral sclerosis is a rare disorder characterized by progressive weakness and tightness (spasticity) of muscles in the arms, legs, and face. The features of this disorder are caused by damage to motor neurons, which are specialized nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord that control muscle movement. Symptoms of juvenile primary lateral sclerosis begin in early childhood and progress slowly over many years. Early symptoms include clumsiness, muscle weakness and spasticity in the legs, and difficulty with balance. As symptoms progress, the spasticity spreads to the arms and hands and individuals develop slurred speech, drooling, difficulty swallowing, and an inability to walk. Frequency Juvenile primary lateral sclerosis is a rare disorder, with few reported cases. Causes Mutations in the ALS2 gene cause most cases of juvenile primary lateral sclerosis. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called alsin. Alsin is abundant in motor neurons, but its function is not fully understood. Mutations in the ALS2 gene alter the instructions for producing alsin. As a result, alsin is unstable and is quickly broken down, or it cannot function properly. It is unclear how the loss of functional alsin protein damages motor neurons and causes juvenile primary lateral sclerosis. Learn more about the gene associated with Juvenile primary lateral sclerosis ALS2 Additional Information from NCBI Gene: ERLIN2 Inheritance When caused by mutations in the ALS2 gene, juvenile primary lateral sclerosis is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition JPLS Juvenile PLS PLSJ Primary lateral sclerosis, juvenile Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Juvenile primary lateral sclerosis Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Juvenile primary lateral sclerosis Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PRIMARY LATERAL SCLEROSIS, JUVENILE; PLSJ Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Hadano S, Kunita R, Otomo A, Suzuki-Utsunomiya K, Ikeda JE. Molecular and
cellular function of ALS2/alsin: implication of membrane dynamics in neuronal
development and degeneration. Neurochem Int. 2007 Jul-Sep;51(2-4):74-84. doi:
10.1016/j.neuint.2007.04.010. Epub 2007 May 4. Citation on PubMed Mintchev N, Zamba-Papanicolaou E, Kleopa KA, Christodoulou K. A novel ALS2
splice-site mutation in a Cypriot juvenile-onset primary lateral sclerosis
family. Neurology. 2009 Jan 6;72(1):28-32. doi:
10.1212/01.wnl.0000338530.77394.60. Citation on PubMed Orrell RW. ALS2-Related Disorder. 2005 Oct 21 [updated 2021 May 13].
In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington,
Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1243/ Citation on PubMed Panzeri C, De Palma C, Martinuzzi A, Daga A, De Polo G, Bresolin N, Miller CC,
Tudor EL, Clementi E, Bassi MT. The first ALS2 missense mutation associated with
JPLS reveals new aspects of alsin biological function. Brain. 2006 Jul;129(Pt
7):1710-9. doi: 10.1093/brain/awl104. Epub 2006 May 2. Citation on PubMed Yang Y, Hentati A, Deng HX, Dabbagh O, Sasaki T, Hirano M, Hung WY, Ouahchi K,
Yan J, Azim AC, Cole N, Gascon G, Yagmour A, Ben-Hamida M, Pericak-Vance M,
Hentati F, Siddique T. The gene encoding alsin, a protein with three
guanine-nucleotide exchange factor domains, is mutated in a form of recessive
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nat Genet. 2001 Oct;29(2):160-5. doi:
10.1038/ng1001-160. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Degenerative Nerve Diseases Genetic Disorders Paralysis MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated July 1, 2013