Distal arthrogryposis type 1: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Distal arthrogryposis type 1 URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/distal-arthrogryposis-type-1/ Distal arthrogryposis type 1 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Distal arthrogryposis type 1 is a disorder characterized by joint deformities (contractures) that restrict movement in the hands and feet. The term "arthrogryposis" comes from the Greek words for joint (arthro-) and crooked or hooked (gryposis). The characteristic features of this condition include permanently bent fingers and toes ( camptodactyly ), overlapping fingers , and a hand deformity in which all of the fingers are angled outward toward the fifth finger ( ulnar deviation ). Clubfoot , which is an inward- and upward-turning foot, is also commonly seen with distal arthrogryposis type 1. The specific hand and foot abnormalities vary among affected individuals. However, this condition typically does not cause any signs and symptoms affecting other parts of the body. Frequency Distal arthrogryposis type 1 affects an estimated 1 in 10,000 people worldwide. Causes Distal arthrogryposis type 1 can be caused by mutations in at least two genes: TPM2 and MYBPC1 . These genes are active (expressed) in muscle cells , where they interact with other muscle proteins to help regulate the tensing of muscle fibers (muscle contraction). It is unclear how mutations in the TPM2 and MYBPC1 genes lead to the joint abnormalities characteristic of distal arthrogryposis type 1. However, researchers speculate that contractures may be related to problems with muscle contraction that limit the movement of joints before birth. In some cases, the genetic cause of distal arthrogryposis type 1 is unknown. Researchers are looking for additional genetic changes that may be responsible for this condition. Learn more about the genes associated with Distal arthrogryposis type 1 MYBPC1 TPM2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of an altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In many cases, a person with distal arthrogryposis type 1 has a parent and other close family members with the condition. Other Names for This Condition AMCD1 Arthrogryposis, distal, type 1 DA1 Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Arthrogryposis, distal, type 1A Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Distal arthrogryposis type 1 Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM ARTHROGRYPOSIS, DISTAL, TYPE 1A; DA1A Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bamshad M, Bohnsack JF, Jorde LB, Carey JC. Distal arthrogryposis type 1:
clinical analysis of a large kindred. Am J Med Genet. 1996 Nov 11;65(4):282-5.
doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19961111)65:43.0.CO;2-R. Citation on PubMed Bamshad M, Jorde LB, Carey JC. A revised and extended classification of the
distal arthrogryposes. Am J Med Genet. 1996 Nov 11;65(4):277-81. doi:
10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19961111)65:43.0.CO;2-M. Citation on PubMed Beck AE, McMillin MJ, Gildersleeve HI, Kezele PR, Shively KM, Carey JC,
Regnier M, Bamshad MJ. Spectrum of mutations that cause distal arthrogryposis
types 1 and 2B. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Mar;161A(3):550-5. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.35809. Epub 2013 Feb 7. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Gurnett CA, Desruisseau DM, McCall K, Choi R, Meyer ZI, Talerico M, Miller SE,
Ju JS, Pestronk A, Connolly AM, Druley TE, Weihl CC, Dobbs MB. Myosin binding
protein C1: a novel gene for autosomal dominant distal arthrogryposis type 1. Hum
Mol Genet. 2010 Apr 1;19(7):1165-73. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp587. Epub 2010 Jan 2. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Sung SS, Brassington AM, Grannatt K, Rutherford A, Whitby FG, Krakowiak PA,
Jorde LB, Carey JC, Bamshad M. Mutations in genes encoding fast-twitch
contractile proteins cause distal arthrogryposis syndromes. Am J Hum Genet. 2003
Mar;72(3):681-90. doi: 10.1086/368294. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Joint Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Clubfoot Contracture deformity Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated October 1, 2017