Costeff syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Costeff syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/costeff-syndrome/ Costeff syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Costeff syndrome is an inherited condition characterized by vision loss, delayed development, and movement problems. Vision loss is primarily caused by degeneration (atrophy) of the optic nerves , which carry information from the eyes to the brain. This optic nerve atrophy often begins in infancy or early childhood and results in vision impairment that worsens over time. Some affected individuals have rapid and involuntary eye movements (nystagmus) or eyes that do not look in the same direction (strabismus). Development of motor skills, such as walking, is often delayed in people with Costeff syndrome. Affected individuals may also have speech difficulties (dysarthria). While some people with Costeff syndrome have mild to moderate intellectual disability, many have normal intelligence. Movement problems in people with Costeff syndrome develop in late childhood and include muscle stiffness (spasticity), impaired muscle coordination (ataxia), and involuntary jerking movements (choreiform movements). As a result of these movement difficulties, individuals with Costeff syndrome may require wheelchair assistance. Costeff syndrome is associated with increased levels of a substance called 3-methylglutaconic acid in the urine (3-methylglutaconic aciduria). The amount of this substance does not appear to influence the signs and symptoms of the condition. Costeff syndrome is one of a group of metabolic disorders that can be diagnosed by the presence of 3-methylglutaconic aciduria. People with Costeff syndrome also have high levels of another acid called 3-methylglutaric acid in their urine. Frequency Costeff syndrome affects an estimated 1 in 10,000 individuals in the Iraqi Jewish population, in which at least 40 cases have been described. Outside this population, only a few affected individuals have been identified. Causes Mutations in a gene called OPA3 cause Costeff syndrome. The OPA3 gene provides instructions for making a protein whose exact function is unknown. The OPA3 protein is found in structures called mitochondria , which are the energy-producing centers of cells. It is thought to play a role in the organization of the shape and structure of mitochondria and in controlled cell death (apoptosis). OPA3 gene mutations that result in Costeff syndrome lead to a loss of OPA3 protein function. Cells without any functional OPA3 protein have abnormally shaped mitochondria. These cells likely have reduced energy production and die prematurely, decreasing energy availability in the body's tissues. Cells in the eyes and brain have high energy demands, and it is likely that they are particularly vulnerable to cell death due to dysfunctional mitochondria and reduced energy production. Learn more about the gene associated with Costeff syndrome OPA3 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition 3-methylglutaconic aciduria type 3 3-methylglutaconic aciduria type III Autosomal recessive OPA3 Autosomal recessive optic atrophy 3 Costeff optic atrophy syndrome Infantile optic atrophy with chorea and spastic paraplegia Iraqi Jewish optic atrophy plus MGA, type III MGA3 OPA3 defect Optic atrophy plus syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: 3-Methylglutaconic aciduria type 3 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center 3-methylglutaconic aciduria type 3 Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM 3-METHYLGLUTACONIC ACIDURIA, TYPE III; MGCA3 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Anikster Y, Kleta R, Shaag A, Gahl WA, Elpeleg O. Type III 3-methylglutaconic
aciduria (optic atrophy plus syndrome, or Costeff optic atrophy syndrome):
identification of the OPA3 gene and its founder mutation in Iraqi Jews. Am J Hum
Genet. 2001 Dec;69(6):1218-24. doi: 10.1086/324651. Epub 2001 Oct 19. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Elpeleg ON, Costeff H, Joseph A, Shental Y, Weitz R, Gibson KM.
3-Methylglutaconic aciduria in the Iraqi-Jewish 'optic atrophy plus' (Costeff)
syndrome. Dev Med Child Neurol. 1994 Feb;36(2):167-72. doi:
10.1111/j.1469-8749.1994.tb11825.x. Citation on PubMed Huizing M, Dorward H, Ly L, Klootwijk E, Kleta R, Skovby F, Pei W, Feldman B,
Gahl WA, Anikster Y. OPA3, mutated in 3-methylglutaconic aciduria type III,
encodes two transcripts targeted primarily to mitochondria. Mol Genet Metab. 2010
Jun;100(2):149-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.03.005. Epub 2010 Mar 16. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Sofer S, Schweiger A, Blumkin L, Yahalom G, Anikster Y, Lev D, Ben-Zeev B,
Lerman-Sagie T, Hassin-Baer S. The neuropsychological profile of patients with
3-methylglutaconic aciduria type III, Costeff syndrome. Am J Med Genet B
Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2015 Apr;168B(3):197-203. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.b.32296. Epub
2015 Feb 5. Citation on PubMed Wortmann SB, Duran M, Anikster Y, Barth PG, Sperl W, Zschocke J, Morava E,
Wevers RA. Inborn errors of metabolism with 3-methylglutaconic aciduria as
discriminative feature: proper classification and nomenclature. J Inherit Metab
Dis. 2013 Nov;36(6):923-8. doi: 10.1007/s10545-012-9580-0. Epub 2013 Jan 8. Citation on PubMed Yahalom G, Anikster Y, Huna-Baron R, Hoffmann C, Blumkin L, Lev D, Tsabari R,
Nitsan Z, Lerman SF, Ben-Zeev B, Pode-Shakked B, Sofer S, Schweiger A,
Lerman-Sagie T, Hassin-Baer S. Costeff syndrome: clinical features and natural
history. J Neurol. 2014 Dec;261(12):2275-82. doi: 10.1007/s00415-014-7481-x. Epub
2014 Sep 9. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Movement Disorders Newborn Screening Optic Nerve Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Optic nerve atrophy Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2019