Megalencephaly-capillary malformation syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Megalencephaly-capillary malformation syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/megalencephaly-capillary-malformation-syndrome/ Megalencephaly-capillary malformation syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Megalencephaly-capillary malformation syndrome (MCAP) is a disorder characterized by overgrowth of several tissues in the body. Its primary features are a large brain (megalencephaly) and abnormalities of small blood vessels in the skin called capillaries (capillary malformations). In individuals with MCAP, megalencephaly leads to an unusually large head size ( macrocephaly ), which is typically evident at birth. After birth, the brain and head continue to grow at a fast rate for the first few years of life; then, the growth slows to a normal rate, although the head remains larger than average. Additional brain abnormalities are common in people with MCAP; these can include excess fluid within the brain (hydrocephalus) and abnormalities in the brain's structure, such as those known as Chiari malformation and polymicrogyria . Abnormal brain development leads to intellectual disability in most affected individuals and can also cause seizures or weak muscle tone (hypotonia). In particular, polymicrogyria is associated with speech delays and difficulty chewing and swallowing. The capillary malformations characteristic of MCAP are composed of enlarged capillaries that increase blood flow near the surface of the skin. These malformations usually look like pink or red spots on the skin. In most affected individuals, capillary malformations occur on the face, particularly the nose, the upper lip, and the area between the nose and upper lip (the philtrum). In other people with MCAP, the malformations appear as patches spread over the body or as a reddish net-like pattern on the skin (cutis marmorata). In some people with MCAP, excessive growth affects not only the brain but other individual parts of the body, which is known as segmental overgrowth. This can lead to one arm or leg that is bigger or longer than the other or a few oversized fingers or toes. Some affected individuals have fusion of the skin between two or more fingers or toes (cutaneous syndactyly). Additional features of MCAP can include flexible joints and skin that stretches easily. Some affected individuals are said to have doughy skin because the tissue under the skin is unusually thick and soft. The gene involved in MCAP is also associated with several types of cancer. Only a small number of individuals with MCAP have developed tumors (in particular, a childhood form of kidney cancer known as Wilms tumor and noncancerous tumors in the nervous system known as meningiomas). Frequency The prevalence of MCAP is unknown. At least 150 affected individuals have been reported in the medical literature. Because the condition is often thought to be misdiagnosed or underdiagnosed, it may be more common than reported. Causes MCAP is caused by mutations in the PIK3CA gene, which provides instructions for making the p110 alpha (p110α) protein. This protein is one piece (subunit) of an enzyme called phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), which plays a role in chemical signaling within cells. PI3K signaling is important for many cell activities, including cell growth and division (proliferation), movement (migration) of cells, and cell survival. These functions make PI3K important for the development of tissues throughout the body, including the brain and blood vessels. PIK3CA gene mutations involved in MCAP alter the p110α protein. The altered subunit makes PI3K abnormally active, which allows cells to grow and divide continuously. Increased cell proliferation leads to the overgrowth of the brain, blood vessels, and other organs and tissues characteristic of MCAP. MCAP is one of several overgrowth syndromes, including Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome , that are caused by mutations in the PIK3CA gene. Together, these conditions are known as the PIK3CA -related overgrowth spectrum (PROS). Learn more about the gene associated with Megalencephaly-capillary malformation syndrome PIK3CA Inheritance MCAP is not inherited from a parent and does not run in families. In people with MCAP, a PIK3CA gene mutation arises randomly in one cell during the early stages of development before birth. As cells continue to divide, some cells will have the mutation and other cells will not. This mixture of cells with and without a genetic mutation is known as mosaicism. Other Names for This Condition M-CM Macrocephaly cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita Macrocephaly-capillary malformation syndrome MCAP MCMTC Megalencephaly cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita Megalencephaly-capillary malformation-polymicrogyria syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Megalencephaly-capillary malformation-polymicrogyria syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Megalencephaly-capillary malformation-polymicrogyria syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MEGALENCEPHALY-CAPILLARY MALFORMATION-POLYMICROGYRIA SYNDROME; MCAP Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Luks VL, Kamitaki N, Vivero MP, Uller W, Rab R, Bovee JV, Rialon KL, Guevara
CJ, Alomari AI, Greene AK, Fishman SJ, Kozakewich HP, Maclellan RA, Mulliken JB,
Rahbar R, Spencer SA, Trenor CC 3rd, Upton J, Zurakowski D, Perkins JA, Kirsh A,
Bennett JT, Dobyns WB, Kurek KC, Warman ML, McCarroll SA, Murillo R. Lymphatic
and other vascular malformative/overgrowth disorders are caused by somatic
mutations in PIK3CA. J Pediatr. 2015 Apr;166(4):1048-54.e1-5. doi:
10.1016/j.jpeds.2014.12.069. Epub 2015 Feb 11. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Martinez-Glez V, Romanelli V, Mori MA, Gracia R, Segovia M, Gonzalez-Meneses
A, Lopez-Gutierrez JC, Gean E, Martorell L, Lapunzina P. Macrocephaly-capillary
malformation: Analysis of 13 patients and review of the diagnostic criteria. Am J
Med Genet A. 2010 Dec;152A(12):3101-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33514. Citation on PubMed Mirzaa GM, Conway RL, Gripp KW, Lerman-Sagie T, Siegel DH, deVries LS, Lev D,
Kramer N, Hopkins E, Graham JM Jr, Dobyns WB. Megalencephaly-capillary
malformation (MCAP) and megalencephaly-polydactyly-polymicrogyria-hydrocephalus
(MPPH) syndromes: two closely related disorders of brain overgrowth and abnormal
brain and body morphogenesis. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Feb;158A(2):269-91. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.34402. Epub 2012 Jan 6. Citation on PubMed Mirzaa GM, Riviere JB, Dobyns WB. Megalencephaly syndromes and activating
mutations in the PI3K-AKT pathway: MPPH and MCAP. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med
Genet. 2013 May;163C(2):122-30. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31361. Epub 2013 Apr 16. Citation on PubMed Riviere JB, Mirzaa GM, O'Roak BJ, Beddaoui M, Alcantara D, Conway RL, St-Onge
J, Schwartzentruber JA, Gripp KW, Nikkel SM, Worthylake T, Sullivan CT, Ward TR,
Butler HE, Kramer NA, Albrecht B, Armour CM, Armstrong L, Caluseriu O, Cytrynbaum
C, Drolet BA, Innes AM, Lauzon JL, Lin AE, Mancini GM, Meschino WS, Reggin JD,
Saggar AK, Lerman-Sagie T, Uyanik G, Weksberg R, Zirn B, Beaulieu CL; Finding of
Rare Disease Genes (FORGE) Canada Consortium; Majewski J, Bulman DE, O'Driscoll
M, Shendure J, Graham JM Jr, Boycott KM, Dobyns WB. De novo germline and
postzygotic mutations in AKT3, PIK3R2 and PIK3CA cause a spectrum of related
megalencephaly syndromes. Nat Genet. 2012 Jun 24;44(8):934-40. doi:
10.1038/ng.2331. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Brain Malformations Genetic Disorders Vascular Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 1, 2017