Pendred syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Pendred syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/pendred-syndrome/ Pendred syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Pendred syndrome is a disorder typically associated with hearing loss and a thyroid condition called a goiter. A goiter is an enlargement of the thyroid gland , which is a butterfly-shaped organ at the base of the neck that produces hormones. If a goiter develops in a person with Pendred syndrome, it usually forms between late childhood and early adulthood. In most cases, this enlargement does not cause the thyroid to malfunction. In most people with Pendred syndrome, severe to profound hearing loss caused by changes in the inner ear (sensorineural hearing loss) is evident at birth. Less commonly, hearing loss does not develop until later in infancy or early childhood. Some affected individuals also have problems with balance caused by dysfunction of the vestibular system, which is the part of the inner ear that helps maintain the body's balance and orientation. An inner ear abnormality called an enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA) is a characteristic feature of Pendred syndrome. The vestibular aqueduct is a bony canal that connects the inner ear with the inside of the skull. Some affected individuals also have an abnormally shaped cochlea, which is a snail-shaped structure in the inner ear that helps process sound. The combination of an enlarged vestibular aqueduct and an abnormally shaped cochlea is known as Mondini malformation. Pendred syndrome shares features with other hearing loss and thyroid conditions, and it is unclear whether they are best considered as separate disorders or as a spectrum of related signs and symptoms. These conditions include a form of nonsyndromic hearing loss (hearing loss that does not affect other parts of the body) called DFNB4, and, in a small number of people, a form of congenital hypothyroidism resulting from an abnormally small thyroid gland (thyroid hypoplasia). All of these conditions are caused by mutations in the same gene. Frequency The prevalence of Pendred syndrome is unknown. However, researchers estimate that it accounts for 7 to 8 percent of all hearing loss that is present from birth (congenital hearing loss). Causes Mutations in the SLC26A4 gene cause about half of all cases of Pendred syndrome. The SLC26A4 gene provides instructions for making a protein called pendrin. This protein transports negatively charged particles (ions), including chloride, iodide, and bicarbonate, into and out of cells. Although the function of pendrin is not fully understood, this protein is important for maintaining the proper levels of ions in the thyroid and the inner ear. Mutations in the SLC26A4 gene alter the structure or function of pendrin, which disrupts ion transport. An imbalance of particular ions disrupts the development and function of the thyroid gland and structures in the inner ear, which leads to the characteristic features of Pendred syndrome. In people with Pendred syndrome who do not have mutations in the SLC26A4 gene, the cause of the condition is unknown. Researchers suspect that other genetic and environmental factors may influence the condition. Learn more about the gene associated with Pendred syndrome SLC26A4 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Autosomal recessive sensorineural hearing impairment, enlarged vestibular aqueduct, and goiter Deafness with goiter Goiter-deafness syndrome Pendred's syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Pendred syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Pendred syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PENDRED SYNDROME; PDS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bizhanova A, Kopp P. Genetics and phenomics of Pendred syndrome. Mol Cell
Endocrinol. 2010 Jun 30;322(1-2):83-90. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2010.03.006. Epub 2010
Mar 15. Citation on PubMed Ito T, Choi BY, King KA, Zalewski CK, Muskett J, Chattaraj P, Shawker T,
Reynolds JC, Butman JA, Brewer CC, Wangemann P, Alper SL, Griffith AJ. SLC26A4
genotypes and phenotypes associated with enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct.
Cell Physiol Biochem. 2011;28(3):545-52. doi: 10.1159/000335119. Epub 2011 Nov
18. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Kopp P. Mutations in the Pendred Syndrome (PDS/SLC26A) gene: an increasingly
complex phenotypic spectrum from goiter to thyroid hypoplasia. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2014 Jan;99(1):67-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-4319. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Smith RJH, Azaiez H, Odell AM. SLC26A4-Related Sensorineural Hearing
Loss. 1998 Sep 28 [updated 2025 Jan 9]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon
RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle
(WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1467/ Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Hearing Disorders and Deafness Thyroid Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Hearing loss Simple goiter Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 1, 2016