Frontonasal dysplasia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Frontonasal dysplasia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/frontonasal-dysplasia/ Frontonasal dysplasia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Frontonasal dysplasia is a condition that results from abnormal development of the head and face before birth. People with frontonasal dysplasia have at least two of the following features: widely spaced eyes ( ocular hypertelorism ); a broad nose; a slit ( cleft ) in one or both sides of the nose; no nasal tip; a central cleft involving the nose, upper lip, or roof of the mouth ( palate ); incomplete formation of the front of the skull with skin covering the head where bone should be (anterior cranium bifidum occultum); or a widow's peak hairline . Other features of frontonasal dysplasia can include additional facial malformations, absence or malformation of the tissue that connects the left and right halves of the brain ( the corpus callosum ), and intellectual disability. There are at least three types of frontonasal dysplasia that are distinguished by their genetic causes and their signs and symptoms. In addition to the features previously described, each type of frontonasal dysplasia is associated with other distinctive features. Individuals with frontonasal dysplasia type 1 typically have abnormalities of the nose, a long area between the nose and upper lip ( philtrum ), and droopy upper eyelids ( ptosis ). Individuals with frontonasal dysplasia type 2 can have hair loss (alopecia) and an enlarged opening in the two bones that make up much of the top and sides of the skull ( enlarged parietal foramina ). Males with this form of the condition often have genital abnormalities. Features of frontonasal dysplasia type 3 include eyes that are missing (anophthalmia) or very small ( microphthalmia ) and low-set ears that are rotated backward. Frontonasal dysplasia type 3 is typically associated with the most severe facial abnormalities, but the severity of the condition varies widely, even among individuals with the same type. Life expectancy of affected individuals depends on the severity of the malformations and whether or not surgical intervention can improve associated health problems, such as breathing and feeding problems caused by the facial clefts. Frequency Frontonasal dysplasia is likely a rare condition; at least 100 cases have been reported in the scientific literature. Causes Mutations in the ALX3 gene cause frontonasal dysplasia type 1, ALX4 gene mutations cause type 2, and ALX1 gene mutations cause type 3. These genes provide instructions for making proteins that are necessary for normal development, particularly of the head and face, before birth. The proteins produced from the ALX3 , ALX4 , and ALX1 genes are transcription factors, which means they attach (bind) to DNA and control the activity of certain genes. Specifically, the proteins control the activity of genes that regulate cell growth and division (proliferation) and movement (migration), ensuring that cells grow and stop growing at specific times and that they are positioned correctly during development. The ALX3 and ALX4 proteins are primarily involved in the development of the nose and surrounding tissues, while the ALX1 protein is involved in development of the eyes, nose, and mouth. ALX3 , ALX4 , or ALX1 gene mutations reduce or eliminate function of the respective protein. As a result, the regulation of cell organization during development of the head and face is disrupted, particularly affecting the middle of the face. Abnormal development of the nose, philtrum , and upper lip leads to the facial clefts that characterize this disorder. This abnormal development also interferes with the proper formation of the skull and other facial structures, leading to anterior cranium bifidum occultum, hypertelorism , and other features of frontonasal dysplasia. Learn more about the genes associated with Frontonasal dysplasia ALX1 ALX3 ALX4 Inheritance When frontonasal dysplasia is caused by mutations in the ALX1 or ALX3 gene, it is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. When ALX4 gene mutations cause frontonasal dysplasia, the condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent . Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Other Names for This Condition FND FNM Frontonasal dysplasia sequence Frontonasal malformation Frontorhiny Median facial cleft syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Frontonasal dysplasia Genetic Testing Registry: Frontonasal dysplasia - severe microphthalmia - severe facial clefting syndrome Genetic Testing Registry: Frontonasal dysplasia with alopecia and genital anomaly Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Frontonasal dysplasia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM FRONTONASAL DYSPLASIA 1; FND1 FRONTONASAL DYSPLASIA 2; FND2 FRONTONASAL DYSPLASIA 3; FND3 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Allam KA, Wan DC, Kawamoto HK, Bradley JP, Sedano HO, Saied S. The spectrum of
median craniofacial dysplasia. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2011 Feb;127(2):812-821. doi:
10.1097/PRS.0b013e318200aa08. Citation on PubMed Giffoni SD, Goncalves VM, Zanardi VA, Lopes VL. Angular analysis of corpus
callosum in 18 patients with frontonasal dysplasia. Arq Neuropsiquiatr. 2004
Jun;62(2A):195-8. doi: 10.1590/s0004-282x2004000200001. Epub 2004 Jun 23. Citation on PubMed Kayserili H, Altunoglu U, Ozgur H, Basaran S, Uyguner ZO. Mild nasal
malformations and parietal foramina caused by homozygous ALX4 mutations. Am J Med
Genet A. 2012 Jan;158A(1):236-44. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34390. Epub 2011 Dec 2. Citation on PubMed Kayserili H, Uz E, Niessen C, Vargel I, Alanay Y, Tuncbilek G, Yigit G,
Uyguner O, Candan S, Okur H, Kaygin S, Balci S, Mavili E, Alikasifoglu M, Haase
I, Wollnik B, Akarsu NA. ALX4 dysfunction disrupts craniofacial and epidermal
development. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Nov 15;18(22):4357-66. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp391.
Epub 2009 Aug 19. Citation on PubMed Pham NS, Rafii A, Liu J, Boyadjiev SA, Tollefson TT. Clinical and genetic
characterization of frontorhiny: report of 3 novel cases and discussion of the
surgical management. Arch Facial Plast Surg. 2011 Nov-Dec;13(6):415-20. doi:
10.1001/archfacial.2011.684. Citation on PubMed Roarty JD, Pron GE, Siegel-Bartelt J, Posnick JC, Buncic JR. Ocular
manifestations of frontonasal dysplasia. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1994
Jan;93(1):25-30. doi: 10.1097/00006534-199401000-00004. Citation on PubMed Twigg SR, Versnel SL, Nurnberg G, Lees MM, Bhat M, Hammond P, Hennekam RC,
Hoogeboom AJ, Hurst JA, Johnson D, Robinson AA, Scambler PJ, Gerrelli D, Nurnberg
P, Mathijssen IM, Wilkie AO. Frontorhiny, a distinctive presentation of
frontonasal dysplasia caused by recessive mutations in the ALX3 homeobox gene. Am
J Hum Genet. 2009 May;84(5):698-705. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.04.009. Epub 2009
Apr 30. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Uz E, Alanay Y, Aktas D, Vargel I, Gucer S, Tuncbilek G, von Eggeling F,
Yilmaz E, Deren O, Posorski N, Ozdag H, Liehr T, Balci S, Alikasifoglu M, Wollnik
B, Akarsu NA. Disruption of ALX1 causes extreme microphthalmia and severe facial
clefting: expanding the spectrum of autosomal-recessive ALX-related frontonasal
dysplasia. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 May 14;86(5):789-96. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.04.002. Epub 2010 May 6. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Wu E, Vargevik K, Slavotinek AM. Subtypes of frontonasal dysplasia are useful
in determining clinical prognosis. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Dec
15;143A(24):3069-78. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31963. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Craniofacial Abnormalities Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Head and face reconstruction Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated April 1, 2014