Autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy with neuromyotonia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy with neuromyotonia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/autosomal-recessive-axonal-neuropathy-with-neuromyotonia/ Autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy with neuromyotonia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy with neuromyotonia is a disorder that affects the peripheral nerves. Peripheral nerves connect the brain and spinal cord to muscles and to sensory cells that detect sensations such as touch, pain, heat, and sound. Axonal neuropathy, a characteristic feature of this condition, is caused by damage to a particular part of peripheral nerves called axons, which are the extensions of nerve cells (neurons) that transmit nerve impulses. In people with autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy with neuromyotonia, the damage primarily causes progressive weakness and wasting (atrophy) of muscles in the feet, legs, and hands. Muscle weakness may be especially apparent during exercise (exercise intolerance) and can lead to an unusual walking style (gait), frequent falls, and joint deformities (contractures) in the hands and feet. In some affected individuals, axonal neuropathy also causes decreased sensitivity to touch, heat, or cold, particularly in the lower arms or legs. Another feature of this condition is neuromyotonia (also known as Isaac syndrome). Neuromyotonia results from overactivation (hyperexcitability) of peripheral nerves, which leads to delayed relaxation of muscles after voluntary tensing (contraction), muscle cramps, and involuntary rippling movement of the muscles (myokymia). Frequency Autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy with neuromyotonia is a rare form of inherited peripheral neuropathy. This group of conditions affects an estimated 1 in 2,500 people. The prevalence of autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy with neuromyotonia is unknown. Causes Autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy with neuromyotonia is caused by mutations in the HINT1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is involved in the function of the nervous system; however its specific role is not well understood. Laboratory studies show that the HINT1 protein has the ability to carry out a chemical reaction called hydrolysis that breaks down certain molecules; however, it is not known what effects the reaction has in the body. HINT1 gene mutations that cause autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy with neuromyotonia lead to production of a HINT1 protein with little or no function. Sometimes the abnormal protein is broken down prematurely. Researchers are working to determine how loss of functional HINT1 protein affects the peripheral nerves and leads to the signs and symptoms of this condition. Learn more about the gene associated with Autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy with neuromyotonia HINT1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition ARAN-NM Autosomal recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2 with neuromyotonia Autosomal recessive neuromyotonia and axonal neuropathy Gamstorp-Wohlfart syndrome Myokymia, myotonia, and muscle wasting NMAN Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy with neuromyotonia Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy with neuromyotonia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM NEUROMYOTONIA AND AXONAL NEUROPATHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE; NMAN Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Caetano JS, Costa C, Baets J, Zimon Phd M, Venancio Phd M, Saraiva Phd J,
Negrao L, Fineza I. Autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy with neuromyotonia: a
rare entity. Pediatr Neurol. 2014 Jan;50(1):104-7. doi:
10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2013.08.028. Epub 2013 Oct 13. Citation on PubMed Zhao H, Race V, Matthijs G, De Jonghe P, Robberecht W, Lambrechts D, Van Damme
P. Exome sequencing reveals HINT1 mutations as a cause of distal hereditary motor
neuropathy. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Jun;22(6):847-50. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.231.
Epub 2013 Oct 9. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Zhou X, Chou TF, Aubol BE, Park CJ, Wolfenden R, Adams J, Wagner CR. Kinetic
mechanism of human histidine triad nucleotide binding protein 1. Biochemistry.
2013 May 21;52(20):3588-600. doi: 10.1021/bi301616c. Epub 2013 May 7. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Zimon M, Baets J, Almeida-Souza L, De Vriendt E, Nikodinovic J, Parman Y,
Battaloglu E, Matur Z, Guergueltcheva V, Tournev I, Auer-Grumbach M, De Rijk P,
Petersen BS, Muller T, Fransen E, Van Damme P, Loscher WN, Barisic N, Mitrovic Z,
Previtali SC, Topaloglu H, Bernert G, Beleza-Meireles A, Todorovic S,
Savic-Pavicevic D, Ishpekova B, Lechner S, Peeters K, Ooms T, Hahn AF, Zuchner S,
Timmerman V, Van Dijck P, Rasic VM, Janecke AR, De Jonghe P, Jordanova A.
Loss-of-function mutations in HINT1 cause axonal neuropathy with neuromyotonia.
Nat Genet. 2012 Oct;44(10):1080-3. doi: 10.1038/ng.2406. Epub 2012 Sep 9. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Peripheral Nerve Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated September 1, 2014