Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy disease: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy disease URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/mitochondrial-neurogastrointestinal-encephalopathy-disease/ Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy disease To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy (MNGIE) disease is a condition that affects several parts of the body, particularly the digestive system and nervous system. The major features of MNGIE disease can appear anytime from infancy to adulthood, but signs and symptoms most often begin by age 20. The medical problems associated with this disorder worsen over time. Almost all  people with MNGIE disease have a condition known as gastrointestinal dysmotility, in which the muscles and nerves of the digestive system do not move food through the digestive tract efficiently. The resulting digestive problems include feelings of fullness (satiety) after eating only a small amount, trouble swallowing (dysphagia), nausea and vomiting after eating, episodes of abdominal pain, diarrhea, and intestinal blockage. These gastrointestinal problems lead to extreme weight loss and reduced muscle mass (cachexia). MNGIE disease is also characterized by abnormalities of the nervous system, although these tend to be milder than the gastrointestinal problems. Affected individuals experience tingling, numbness, and weakness in their limbs (peripheral neuropathy), particularly in the hands and feet.  Additional neurological signs and symptoms can include droopy eyelids ( ptosis ), weakness of the muscles that control eye movement (ophthalmoplegia), and hearing loss. Leukoencephalopathy, which is the deterioration of a type of brain tissue known as white matter, is a hallmark of MNGIE disease. These changes in the brain can be seen with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), though they usually do not cause symptoms in people with this disorder. Frequency The prevalence of MNGIE disease is unknown. Fewer than 200 people with this disorder have been described in the scientific literature. Causes Variants (also called mutations) in the TYMP gene cause most cases of MNGIE disease. The TYMP gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called thymidine phosphorylase. Thymidine is a molecule known as a nucleoside. After a chemical modification, thymidine is used as a building block of DNA .  Thymidine phosphorylase breaks down thymidine into smaller molecules, which helps regulate the level of nucleosides in cells. TYMP gene variants greatly reduce or eliminate the activity of thymidine phosphorylase.  A shortage of this enzyme allows thymidine to build up to very high levels in the body. Researchers believe that this excess of thymidine  damages a particular kind of DNA known as mitochondrial DNA or mtDNA. Mitochondria are structures within cells that convert the energy from food into a form that cells can use. Although most DNA is packaged in chromosomes within the nucleus, mitochondria also have a small amount of their own DNA. Mitochondria use nucleosides, including thymidine, to build new molecules of mtDNA. A loss of thymidine phosphorylase activity and the resulting buildup of thymidine disrupt the usual maintenance and repair of mtDNA. As a result, variants can accumulate in mtDNA, causing it to become unstable. In people with MNGIE disease, mitochondria may also have less mtDNA than usual (mtDNA depletion). These genetic changes impair the normal function of mitochondria. Although mtDNA abnormalities underlie the digestive and neurological problems characteristic of MNGIE disease, it is unclear how defective mitochondria cause the specific features of the disorder. Rarely, variants in other genes can cause MNGIE disease. In the remaining cases, the cause of the condition is unknown. Learn more about the genes associated with Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy disease POLG RRM2B TYMP Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell must have a variant to cause the disorder. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition MEPOP Mitochondrial myopathy with sensorimotor polyneuropathy, ophthalmoplegia, and pseudo-obstruction Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy syndrome MNGIE disease MNGIE syndrome Myoneurogastrointestinal encephalopathy syndrome Oculogastrointestinal muscular dystrophy OGIMD POLIP Polyneuropathy, ophthalmoplegia, leukoencephalopathy, and intestinal pseudo-obstruction Thymidine phosphorylase deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome 1 Genetic Testing Registry: Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome 4b Genetic Testing Registry: Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome 8a Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MITOCHONDRIAL DNA DEPLETION SYNDROME 1 (MNGIE TYPE); MTDPS1 MITOCHONDRIAL DNA DEPLETION SYNDROME 8A (ENCEPHALOMYOPATHIC TYPE WITH RENAL TUBULOPATHY); MTDPS8A MITOCHONDRIAL DNA DEPLETION SYNDROME 4B (MNGIE TYPE); MTDPS4B Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Hirano M, Marti R, Spinazzola A, Nishino I, Nishigaki Y. Thymidine
phosphorylase deficiency causes MNGIE: an autosomal recessive mitochondrial
disorder. Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids. 2004 Oct;23(8-9):1217-25. doi:
10.1081/NCN-200027485. Citation on PubMed Hirano M, Silvestri G, Blake DM, Lombes A, Minetti C, Bonilla E, Hays AP,
Lovelace RE, Butler I, Bertorini TE, et al. Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal
encephalomyopathy (MNGIE): clinical, biochemical, and genetic features of an
autosomal recessive mitochondrial disorder. Neurology. 1994 Apr;44(4):721-7. doi:
10.1212/wnl.44.4.721. Citation on PubMed Hirano M. Mitochondrial Neurogastrointestinal Encephalopathy Disease. 2005 Apr
22 [updated 2016 Jan 14]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace
SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA):
University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1179/ Citation on PubMed Lara MC, Valentino ML, Torres-Torronteras J, Hirano M, Marti R. Mitochondrial
neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy (MNGIE): biochemical features and
therapeutic approaches. Biosci Rep. 2007 Jun;27(1-3):151-63. doi:
10.1007/s10540-007-9043-2. Citation on PubMed Marti R, Spinazzola A, Nishino I, Andreu AL, Naini A, Tadesse S, Oliver JA,
Hirano M. Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy and thymidine
metabolism: results and hypotheses. Mitochondrion. 2002 Nov;2(1-2):143-7. doi:
10.1016/s1567-7249(02)00036-3. Citation on PubMed Nishino I, Spinazzola A, Hirano M. MNGIE: from nuclear DNA to mitochondrial
DNA. Neuromuscul Disord. 2001 Jan;11(1):7-10. doi: 10.1016/s0960-8966(00)00159-0. Citation on PubMed Nishino I, Spinazzola A, Papadimitriou A, Hammans S, Steiner I, Hahn CD,
Connolly AM, Verloes A, Guimaraes J, Maillard I, Hamano H, Donati MA, Semrad CE,
Russell JA, Andreu AL, Hadjigeorgiou GM, Vu TH, Tadesse S, Nygaard TG, Nonaka I,
Hirano I, Bonilla E, Rowland LP, DiMauro S, Hirano M. Mitochondrial
neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy: an autosomal recessive disorder due to
thymidine phosphorylase mutations. Ann Neurol. 2000 Jun;47(6):792-800. Citation on PubMed Rajakulendran S, Pitceathly RD, Taanman JW, Costello H, Sweeney MG, Woodward
CE, Jaunmuktane Z, Holton JL, Jacques TS, Harding BN, Fratter C, Hanna MG, Rahman
S. A Clinical, Neuropathological and Genetic Study of Homozygous A467T
POLG-Related Mitochondrial Disease. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 6;11(1):e0145500. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0145500. eCollection 2016. Citation on PubMed Teitelbaum JE, Berde CB, Nurko S, Buonomo C, Perez-Atayde AR, Fox VL.
Diagnosis and management of MNGIE syndrome in children: case report and review of
the literature. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2002 Sep;35(3):377-83. doi:
10.1097/00005176-200209000-00029. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Digestive Diseases Genetic Brain Disorders Genetic Disorders Mitochondrial Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Leukoencephalopathy (Image) Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated September 20, 2023