Blau syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Blau syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/blau-syndrome/ Blau syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Blau syndrome is an inflammatory disorder that primarily affects the skin, joints, and eyes. Signs and symptoms begin in childhood, usually before age 4. A form of skin inflammation called granulomatous dermatitis is typically the earliest sign of Blau syndrome. This skin condition causes a persistent rash that can be scaly or involve hard lumps (nodules) that can be felt under the skin. The rash is usually found on the torso, arms, and legs. Arthritis is another common feature of Blau syndrome. In affected individuals, arthritis is characterized by inflammation of the lining of the joints (the synovium). This inflammation, known as synovitis, is associated with swelling and joint pain. Synovitis usually begins in the joints of the hands, feet, wrists, and ankles. As the condition worsens, it can involve additional joints and restrict movement by decreasing the range of motion in many joints. In people with Blau syndrome, the tendons as well as the joints can be inflamed, causing tenosynovitis. Most people with Blau syndrome also develop uveitis, which is swelling and inflammation of the middle layer of the eye (the uvea). The uvea includes the colored portion of the eye ( the iris ) and related tissues that underlie the white part of the eye (the sclera). Uveitis can cause eye irritation and pain, increased sensitivity to bright light (photophobia), and blurred vision. Other structures in the eye can also become inflamed, including the outermost protective layer of the eye (the conjunctiva), the tear glands, the specialized light-sensitive tissue that lines the back of the eye ( the retina ), and the nerve that carries information from the eye to the brain (the optic nerve). While individuals with Blau syndrome may have normal vision, inflammation of any of these structures can lead to severe vision impairment or blindness. Some individuals with Blau syndrome develop kidney disease (nephritis) due to inflammation. They may also have deposits of calcium in the kidneys (nephrocalcinosis) and often develop chronic kidney failure. Inflammation of blood vessels (vasculitis) can cause scarring and tissue death in the vessels and impedes blood flow to tissues and organs. Less commonly, Blau syndrome can affect other parts of the body, including the liver, spleen, lymph nodes, brain, blood vessels, lungs, and heart. Inflammation involving these organs and tissues can impair their function and cause life-threatening complications. Rarely, affected individuals have disturbances in nerve function (neuropathy), episodes of fever, or high blood pressure in the blood vessels that carry blood from the heart to the lungs (pulmonary hypertension). Frequency Blau syndrome is a very rare disorder. It is estimated to affect fewer than 1 in 1 million children worldwide. Causes Blau syndrome results from mutations in the NOD2 gene. The protein produced from this gene helps defend the body from foreign invaders, such as viruses and bacteria, by playing several essential roles in the immune response, including inflammatory reactions. An inflammatory reaction occurs when the immune system sends signaling molecules and white blood cells to a site of injury or disease to fight microbial invaders and facilitate tissue repair. The NOD2 gene mutations that cause Blau syndrome result in a NOD2 protein that is overactive, which can alter immune responses and trigger an abnormal inflammatory reaction. However, it is unclear how overactivation of the NOD2 protein causes the specific pattern of inflammation affecting the joints, eyes, and skin that is characteristic of Blau syndrome. Learn more about the gene associated with Blau syndrome NOD2 Inheritance Blau syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Most affected individuals have one parent with the condition. In some cases, people with the characteristic features of Blau syndrome do not have a family history of the condition. Some researchers believe that these individuals have a non-inherited version of the disorder called early-onset sarcoidosis. Other Names for This Condition Arthrocutaneouveal granulomatosis Early-onset sarcoidosis Familial granulomatosis, Blau type Familial juvenile systemic granulomatosis Granulomatous inflammatory arthritis, dermatitis, and uveitis, familial Pediatric granulomatous arthritis Additional Information & Resources Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Blau syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM BLAU SYNDROME; BLAUS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Kanazawa N, Okafuji I, Kambe N, Nishikomori R, Nakata-Hizume M, Nagai S, Fuji
A, Yuasa T, Manki A, Sakurai Y, Nakajima M, Kobayashi H, Fujiwara I, Tsutsumi H,
Utani A, Nishigori C, Heike T, Nakahata T, Miyachi Y. Early-onset sarcoidosis and
CARD15 mutations with constitutive nuclear factor-kappaB activation: common
genetic etiology with Blau syndrome. Blood. 2005 Feb 1;105(3):1195-7. doi:
10.1182/blood-2004-07-2972. Epub 2004 Sep 30. Citation on PubMed Miceli-Richard C, Lesage S, Rybojad M, Prieur AM, Manouvrier-Hanu S, Hafner R,
Chamaillard M, Zouali H, Thomas G, Hugot JP. CARD15 mutations in Blau syndrome.
Nat Genet. 2001 Sep;29(1):19-20. doi: 10.1038/ng720. Citation on PubMed Pillai P, Sobrin L. Blau syndrome-associated uveitis and the NOD2 gene. Semin
Ophthalmol. 2013 Sep-Nov;28(5-6):327-32. doi: 10.3109/08820538.2013.825285. Epub
2013 Sep 6. Citation on PubMed Punzi L, Furlan A, Podswiadek M, Gava A, Valente M, De Marchi M, Peserico A.
Clinical and genetic aspects of Blau syndrome: a 25-year follow-up of one family
and a literature review. Autoimmun Rev. 2009 Jan;8(3):228-32. doi:
10.1016/j.autrev.2008.07.034. Epub 2008 Aug 19. Citation on PubMed Punzi L, Gava A, Galozzi P, Sfriso P. Miscellaneous non-inflammatory
musculoskeletal conditions. Blau syndrome. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2011
Oct;25(5):703-14. doi: 10.1016/j.berh.2011.10.017. Citation on PubMed Rose CD, Arostegui JI, Martin TM, Espada G, Scalzi L, Yague J, Rosenbaum JT,
Modesto C, Cristina Arnal M, Merino R, Garcia-Consuegra J, Carballo Silva MA,
Wouters CH. NOD2-associated pediatric granulomatous arthritis, an expanding
phenotype: study of an international registry and a national cohort in Spain.
Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Jun;60(6):1797-803. doi: 10.1002/art.24533. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Rose CD, Doyle TM, McIlvain-Simpson G, Coffman JE, Rosenbaum JT, Davey MP,
Martin TM. Blau syndrome mutation of CARD15/NOD2 in sporadic early onset
granulomatous arthritis. J Rheumatol. 2005 Feb;32(2):373-5. Citation on PubMed Rose CD, Martin TM, Wouters CH. Blau syndrome revisited. Curr Opin Rheumatol.
2011 Sep;23(5):411-8. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e328349c430. Citation on PubMed Rose CD, Pans S, Casteels I, Anton J, Bader-Meunier B, Brissaud P, Cimaz R,
Espada G, Fernandez-Martin J, Hachulla E, Harjacek M, Khubchandani R, Mackensen
F, Merino R, Naranjo A, Oliveira-Knupp S, Pajot C, Russo R, Thomee C, Vastert S,
Wulffraat N, Arostegui JI, Foley KP, Bertin J, Wouters CH. Blau syndrome:
cross-sectional data from a multicentre study of clinical, radiological and
functional outcomes. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2015 Jun;54(6):1008-16. doi:
10.1093/rheumatology/keu437. Epub 2014 Nov 20. Citation on PubMed Wouters CH, Maes A, Foley KP, Bertin J, Rose CD. Blau syndrome, the prototypic
auto-inflammatory granulomatous disease. Pediatr Rheumatol Online J. 2014 Aug
6;12:33. doi: 10.1186/1546-0096-12-33. eCollection 2014. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Arthritis Eye Diseases Genetic Disorders Skin Conditions MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Synovial Fluid (Image) Uveitis Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated January 1, 2020