Aspartylglucosaminuria: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Aspartylglucosaminuria URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/aspartylglucosaminuria/ Aspartylglucosaminuria To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Aspartylglucosaminuria is a condition that primarily affects mental functioning and movement. This conditions worsens over time. Infants with aspartylglucosaminuria appear healthy at birth, and development is typically normal throughout early childhood. Around the age of 2 or 3, affected children usually begin to have delayed speech, mild intellectual disability, and problems coordinating movements. Other features that develop in childhood include respiratory infections, a protrusion of organs through gaps in muscles (hernia), and a growth spurt resulting in a large head size (macrocephaly). Intellectual disability and movement problems worsen in adolescence. Most people with this disorder lose much of the speech they have learned, and affected adults usually have only a few words in their vocabulary. Adults with aspartylglucosaminuria often have psychological disorders and may develop seizures. People with aspartylglucosaminuria may also have bones that become progressively weak and prone to fracture ( osteoporosis ), an unusually large range of joint movement (hypermobility), and loose skin. Affected individuals tend to have a characteristic facial appearance that includes widely spaced eyes ( ocular hypertelorism ), small ears , and full lips. The nose is short and broad and the face is usually square-shaped. They often have poor oral health, including infections and gum disease (gingivitis). Children with this condition may be tall for their age, but lack of a growth spurt in puberty typically causes adults to be short with a small head size (microcephaly). Individuals with aspartylglucosaminuria usually survive into mid-adulthood. Frequency In Finland, it is estimated that 1 to 3 individuals are born with aspartylglucosaminuria each year. This condition is less common outside of Finland, but the incidence is unknown. Causes Variants (also known as mutations) in the AGA gene cause aspartylglucosaminuria. The AGA gene provides instructions for producing an enzyme called aspartylglucosaminidase. This enzyme is active in lysosomes , which are structures inside cells that act as recycling centers. Within lysosomes, the enzyme helps break down complex chains of sugar molecules (oligosaccharides) attached to certain proteins (glycoproteins). AGA gene variants result in a lack (deficiency) of the aspartylglucosaminidase enzyme in lysosomes, preventing the normal breakdown of glycoproteins. As a result, glycoproteins can build up within the lysosomes. Excess glycoproteins disrupt the normal functions of the cell and can result in cell death. A buildup of glycoproteins seems to particularly affect nerve cells in the brain; loss of these cells causes many of the signs and symptoms of aspartylglucosaminuria. Learn more about the gene associated with Aspartylglucosaminuria AGA Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have variants. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition AGA deficiency Aspartylglucosamidase deficiency Aspartylglucosaminidase deficiency Aspartylglycosaminuria Glycosylasparaginase deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Aspartylglucosaminuria Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Aspartylglucosaminuria Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM ASPARTYLGLUCOSAMINURIA; AGU Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Aronson NN Jr. Aspartylglycosaminuria: biochemistry and molecular biology.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Oct 8;1455(2-3):139-54. doi:
10.1016/s0925-4439(99)00076-9. Citation on PubMed Arvio M, Mononen I. Aspartylglycosaminuria: a review. Orphanet J Rare Dis.
2016 Dec 1;11(1):162. doi: 10.1186/s13023-016-0544-6. Citation on PubMed Arvio MA, Peippo MM, Arvio PJ, Kaariainen HA. Dysmorphic facial features in
aspartylglucosaminuria patients and carriers. Clin Dysmorphol. 2004
Jan;13(1):11-5. doi: 10.1097/00019605-200401000-00003. Citation on PubMed Goodspeed K, Feng C, Laine M, Lund TC. Aspartylglucosaminuria: Clinical
Presentation and Potential Therapies. J Child Neurol. 2021 Apr;36(5):403-414.
doi: 10.1177/0883073820980904. Epub 2021 Jan 13. Citation on PubMed Saarela J, Laine M, Oinonen C, von Schantz C, Jalanko A, Rouvinen J, Peltonen
L. Molecular pathogenesis of a disease: structural consequences of
aspartylglucosaminuria mutations. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Apr 15;10(9):983-95. doi:
10.1093/hmg/10.9.983. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Developmental Disabilities Genetic Brain Disorders Genetic Disorders Metabolic Disorders Seizures MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated January 19, 2022