Proopiomelanocortin deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Proopiomelanocortin deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/proopiomelanocortin-deficiency/ Proopiomelanocortin deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Proopiomelanocortin (POMC) deficiency causes severe obesity that begins at an early age. In addition to obesity, people with this condition have low levels of a hormone known as adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and tend to have red hair and pale skin. Affected infants are usually a normal weight at birth, but they are constantly hungry, which leads to excessive feeding (hyperphagia). The babies continuously gain weight and are severely obese by age 1. Affected individuals experience excessive hunger and remain obese for life. It is unclear if these individuals are prone to weight-related conditions like cardiovascular disease or type 2 diabetes . Low levels of ACTH lead to a condition called adrenal insufficiency, which occurs when the pair of small glands on top of the kidneys (the adrenal glands) do not produce enough hormones. Adrenal insufficiency often results in periods of severely low blood sugar (glucose), known as hypoglycemia. Adrenal insufficiency may also cause seizures, elevated levels of a toxic substance called bilirubin in the blood (hyperbilirubinemia), and a reduced ability to produce and release a digestive fluid called bile (cholestasis). Without early treatment, adrenal insufficiency can be fatal. Pale skin that easily burns when exposed to the sun and red hair are common in POMC deficiency, although not everyone with the condition has these characteristics. Frequency POMC deficiency is a rare condition; approximately 50 cases have been reported in the medical literature. Causes POMC deficiency is caused by mutations in the POMC gene, which provides instructions for making the proopiomelanocortin protein. This protein is cut (cleaved) into smaller pieces called peptides that have different functions in the body. One of these peptides, ACTH, stimulates the release of another hormone called cortisol from the adrenal glands. Cortisol is involved in the maintenance of blood glucose levels. Another peptide, alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone (α-MSH), plays a role in the production of the pigment that gives skin and hair their color. The α-MSH peptide and another peptide called beta-melanocyte stimulating hormone (β-MSH) act in the brain to help maintain the balance between energy from food taken into the body and energy spent by the body. The correct balance is important to control eating and weight. POMC gene mutations that cause POMC deficiency result in production of an abnormally short version of the POMC protein or no protein at all. As a result, there is a shortage of the peptides made from POMC, including ACTH, α-MSH, and β-MSH. Without ACTH, there is a reduction in cortisol production, leading to adrenal insufficiency. Decreased α-MSH in the skin reduces pigment production, resulting in the red hair and pale skin often seen in people with POMC deficiency. Loss of α-MSH and β-MSH in the brain dysregulates the body's energy balance, leading to overeating and severe obesity. POMC deficiency is a rare cause of obesity; POMC gene mutations are not frequently associated with more common, complex forms of obesity. Researchers are studying other factors that are likely involved in these forms. Learn more about the gene associated with Proopiomelanocortin deficiency POMC Inheritance POMC deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with this condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene. They typically do not have POMC deficiency, but they may have an increased risk of obesity. Other Names for This Condition Obesity, early-onset, adrenal insufficiency, and red hair POMC deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Obesity due to pro-opiomelanocortin deficiency Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Obesity due to pro-opiomelanocortin deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM OBESITY, EARLY-ONSET, WITH ADRENAL INSUFFICIENCY AND RED HAIR; OBAIRH Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Krude H, Biebermann H, Gruters A. Mutations in the human proopiomelanocortin
gene. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2003 Jun;994:233-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1749-6632.2003.tb03185.x. Citation on PubMed Krude H, Biebermann H, Luck W, Horn R, Brabant G, Gruters A. Severe
early-onset obesity, adrenal insufficiency and red hair pigmentation caused by
POMC mutations in humans. Nat Genet. 1998 Jun;19(2):155-7. doi: 10.1038/509. Citation on PubMed Krude H, Biebermann H, Schnabel D, Tansek MZ, Theunissen P, Mullis PE, Gruters
A. Obesity due to proopiomelanocortin deficiency: three new cases and treatment
trials with thyroid hormone and ACTH4-10. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003
Oct;88(10):4633-40. doi: 10.1210/jc.2003-030502. Citation on PubMed Krude H, Gruters A. Implications of proopiomelanocortin (POMC) mutations in
humans: the POMC deficiency syndrome. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2000
Jan-Feb;11(1):15-22. doi: 10.1016/s1043-2760(99)00213-1. Citation on PubMed Lee YS. The role of leptin-melanocortin system and human weight regulation:
lessons from experiments of nature. Ann Acad Med Singap. 2009 Jan;38(1):34-11. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Obesity Obesity in Children MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA ACTH blood test Genetics Related Medical Tests Adrenocorticotropic Hormone (ACTH) Bilirubin Blood Test Obesity Screening Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2014