PDGFRA-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → PDGFRA-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/pdgfra-associated-chronic-eosinophilic-leukemia/ PDGFRA-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description PDGFRA -associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia is a form of blood cell cancer characterized by an elevated number of cells called eosinophils in the blood. These cells help fight infections by certain parasites and are involved in the inflammation associated with allergic reactions. However, these circumstances do not account for the increased number of eosinophils in PDGFRA -associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia. Another characteristic feature of PDGFRA -associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia is organ damage caused by the excess eosinophils. Eosinophils release substances to aid in the immune response, but the release of excessive amounts of these substances causes damage to one or more organs, most commonly the heart, skin, lungs, or nervous system. Eosinophil-associated organ damage can lead to a heart condition known as eosinophilic endomyocardial disease, skin rashes, coughing, difficulty breathing, swelling ( edema ) in the lower limbs, confusion, changes in behavior, or impaired movement or sensations. People with PDGFRA -associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia can also have an enlarged spleen (splenomegaly) and elevated levels of certain chemicals called vitamin B12 and tryptase in the blood. Some people with PDGFRA -associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia have an increased number of other types of white blood cells, such as neutrophils or mast cells. Occasionally, people with PDGFRA -associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia develop other blood cell cancers, such as acute myeloid leukemia or B-cell or T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia or lymphoblastic lymphoma. PDGFRA -associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia is often grouped with a related condition called hypereosinophilic syndrome. These two conditions have very similar signs and symptoms; however, the cause of hypereosinophilic syndrome is unknown. Frequency PDGFRA -associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia is a rare condition; however, the exact prevalence is unknown. Causes PDGFRA -associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia is caused by mutations in the PDGFRA gene. This condition usually occurs as a result of genetic rearrangements that fuse part of the PDGFRA gene with part of another gene. Rarely, changes in single DNA building blocks (point mutations) in the PDGFRA gene are found in people with this condition. Genetic rearrangements and point mutations affecting the PDGFRA gene are somatic mutations, which are mutations acquired during a person's lifetime that are present only in certain cells. The somatic mutation occurs initially in a single cell, which continues to grow and divide, producing a group of cells with the same mutation (a clonal population). The most common genetic abnormality in PDGFRA -associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia results from a deletion of genetic material from chromosome 4 , which brings together part of the PDGFRA gene and part of the FIP1L1 gene, creating the FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion gene. The FIP1L1 gene provides instructions for a protein that plays a role in forming the genetic blueprints for making proteins (messenger RNA or mRNA). The PDGFRA gene provides instructions for making a receptor protein that is found in the cell membrane of certain cell types. Receptor proteins have specific sites into which certain other proteins, called ligands, fit like keys into locks. When the ligand attaches (binds), the PDGFRA receptor protein is turned on (activated), which leads to activation of a series of proteins in multiple signaling pathways. These signaling pathways control many important cellular processes, such as cell growth and division (proliferation) and cell survival. The FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion gene (as well as other PDGFRA fusion genes) provides instructions for making a fusion protein that has the function of the normal PDGFRA protein. However, the fusion protein does not require ligand binding to be activated. Similarly, point mutations in the PDGFRA gene can result in a PDGFRA protein that is activated without ligand binding. As a result, the signaling pathways are constantly turned on (constitutively activated), which increases the proliferation and survival of cells. When the FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion gene mutation or point mutations in the PDGFRA gene occur in blood cell precursors, the growth of eosinophils (and occasionally other blood cells, such as neutrophils and mast cells) is poorly controlled, leading to PDGFRA -associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia. It is unclear why eosinophils are preferentially affected by this genetic change. Learn more about the genes and chromosome associated with PDGFRA-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia FIP1L1 PDGFRA chromosome 4 Inheritance PDGFRA -associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia is not inherited and occurs in people with no history of the condition in their families. Mutations that lead to a PDGFRA fusion gene and PDGFRA point mutations are somatic mutations, which means they occur during a person's lifetime and are found only in certain cells. Somatic mutations are not inherited. Males are more likely to develop PDGFRA -associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia than females because, for unknown reasons, PDGFRA fusion genes are found more often in males. Other Names for This Condition Chronic eosinophilic leukemia with FIP1L1-PDGFRA Myeloid and lymphoid neoplasms associated with PDGFRA rearrangement Myeloid and lymphoid neoplasms with PDGFRA rearrangement Myeloid/lymphoid neoplasms with PDGFRA rearrangement PDGFRA-associated myeloproliferative neoplasm Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Hypereosinophilic syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM HYPEREOSINOPHILIC SYNDROME, IDIOPATHIC; HES Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Buitenhuis M, Verhagen LP, Cools J, Coffer PJ. Molecular mechanisms underlying
FIP1L1-PDGFRA-mediated myeloproliferation. Cancer Res. 2007 Apr 15;67(8):3759-66.
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-4183. Citation on PubMed Cools J, DeAngelo DJ, Gotlib J, Stover EH, Legare RD, Cortes J, Kutok J, Clark
J, Galinsky I, Griffin JD, Cross NC, Tefferi A, Malone J, Alam R, Schrier SL,
Schmid J, Rose M, Vandenberghe P, Verhoef G, Boogaerts M, Wlodarska I, Kantarjian
H, Marynen P, Coutre SE, Stone R, Gilliland DG. A tyrosine kinase created by
fusion of the PDGFRA and FIP1L1 genes as a therapeutic target of imatinib in
idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2003 Mar 27;348(13):1201-14.
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa025217. Citation on PubMed Elling C, Erben P, Walz C, Frickenhaus M, Schemionek M, Stehling M, Serve H,
Cross NC, Hochhaus A, Hofmann WK, Berdel WE, Muller-Tidow C, Reiter A,
Koschmieder S. Novel imatinib-sensitive PDGFRA-activating point mutations in
hypereosinophilic syndrome induce growth factor independence and leukemia-like
disease. Blood. 2011 Mar 10;117(10):2935-43. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-05-286757.
Epub 2011 Jan 11. Citation on PubMed Fukushima K, Matsumura I, Ezoe S, Tokunaga M, Yasumi M, Satoh Y, Shibayama H,
Tanaka H, Iwama A, Kanakura Y. FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha imposes eosinophil lineage
commitment on hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. J Biol Chem. 2009 Mar
20;284(12):7719-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807489200. Epub 2009 Jan 14. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Metzgeroth G, Walz C, Score J, Siebert R, Schnittger S, Haferlach C, Popp H,
Haferlach T, Erben P, Mix J, Muller MC, Beneke H, Muller L, Del Valle F, Aulitzky
WE, Wittkowsky G, Schmitz N, Schulte C, Muller-Hermelink K, Hodges E, Whittaker
SJ, Diecker F, Dohner H, Schuld P, Hehlmann R, Hochhaus A, Cross NC, Reiter A.
Recurrent finding of the FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion gene in eosinophilia-associated
acute myeloid leukemia and lymphoblastic T-cell lymphoma. Leukemia. 2007
Jun;21(6):1183-8. doi: 10.1038/sj.leu.2404662. Epub 2007 Mar 22. Citation on PubMed Roufosse FE, Goldman M, Cogan E. Hypereosinophilic syndromes. Orphanet J Rare
Dis. 2007 Sep 11;2:37. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-37. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Vandenberghe P, Wlodarska I, Michaux L, Zachee P, Boogaerts M, Vanstraelen D,
Herregods MC, Van Hoof A, Selleslag D, Roufosse F, Maerevoet M, Verhoef G, Cools
J, Gilliland DG, Hagemeijer A, Marynen P. Clinical and molecular features of
FIP1L1-PDFGRA (+) chronic eosinophilic leukemias. Leukemia. 2004
Apr;18(4):734-42. doi: 10.1038/sj.leu.2403313. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Eosinophilic Disorders Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Eosinophil count - absolute Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated September 1, 2015