Pilomatricoma: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Pilomatricoma URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/pilomatricoma/ Pilomatricoma To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Pilomatricoma, also known as pilomatrixoma, is a type of noncancerous (benign) skin tumor associated with hair follicles. Hair follicles are specialized structures in the skin where hair growth occurs. Pilomatricomas occur most often on the head or neck, although they can also be found on the arms, torso, or legs. A pilomatricoma feels like a small, hard lump under the skin. This type of tumor grows relatively slowly and usually does not cause pain or other symptoms. Most affected individuals have a single tumor, although rarely multiple pilomatricomas can occur. If a pilomatricoma is removed surgically, it tends not to grow back (recur). Most pilomatricomas occur in people under the age of 20. However, these tumors can also appear later in life. Almost all pilomatricomas are benign, but a very small percentage are cancerous ( malignant ). Unlike the benign form, the malignant version of this tumor (known as a pilomatrix carcinoma) occurs most often in middle age or late in life. Pilomatricoma usually occurs without other signs or symptoms (isolated), but this type of tumor has also rarely been reported with inherited conditions. Disorders that can be associated with pilomatricoma include Gardner syndrome, which is characterized by multiple growths (polyps) and cancers of the colon and rectum ; myotonic dystrophy , which is a form of muscular dystrophy; and Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome , which is a condition that affects many parts of the body and is associated with an increased risk of both benign and malignant tumors. Frequency Pilomatricoma is an uncommon tumor. The exact prevalence is unknown, but pilomatricoma probably accounts for less than 1 percent of all benign skin tumors. Causes Mutations in the CTNNB1 gene are found in almost all cases of isolated pilomatricoma. These mutations are somatic, which means they are acquired during a person's lifetime and are present only in tumor cells. Somatic mutations are not inherited. The CTNNB1 gene provides instructions for making a protein called beta-catenin .  This protein plays an important role in sticking cells together (cell adhesion) and in communication between cells. It is also involved in cell signaling as part of the Wnt signaling pathway . This pathway promotes the growth and division (proliferation) of cells and helps determine the specialized functions a cell will have (differentiation). Wnt signaling is involved in many aspects of development before birth, as well as the maintenance and repair of adult tissues. Among its many activities, beta-catenin appears to be necessary for the normal function of hair follicles. This protein is active in cells that make up a part of the hair follicle known as the matrix. These cells divide and mature to form the different components of the hair follicle and the hair shaft. As matrix cells divide, the hair shaft is pushed upward and extends beyond the skin. Mutations in the CTNNB1 gene lead to a version of beta-catenin that is always turned on (constitutively active). The overactive protein triggers matrix cells to divide too quickly and in an uncontrolled way, leading to the formation of a pilomatricoma. Most pilomatrix carcinomas, the malignant version of pilomatricoma, also have somatic mutations in the CTNNB1 gene. It is unclear why some pilomatricomas are cancerous but most others are not. Learn more about the gene associated with Pilomatricoma CTNNB1 Inheritance Most people with isolated pilomatricoma do not have any other affected family members. However, rare families with multiple affected members have been reported. In these cases, the inheritance pattern of the condition (if any) is unknown. Other Names for This Condition Benign pilomatricoma Benign pilomatrixoma Calcifying epithelioma of Malherbe Malherbe calcifying epithelioma Pilomatrixoma Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Pilomatrixoma Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Pilomatrixoma Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PILOMATRIXOMA Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Chan EF, Gat U, McNiff JM, Fuchs E. A common human skin tumour is caused by
activating mutations in beta-catenin. Nat Genet. 1999 Apr;21(4):410-3. doi:
10.1038/7747. Citation on PubMed Julian CG, Bowers PW. A clinical review of 209 pilomatricomas. J Am Acad
Dermatol. 1998 Aug;39(2 Pt 1):191-5. doi: 10.1016/s0190-9622(98)70073-8. Citation on PubMed Lan MY, Lan MC, Ho CY, Li WY, Lin CZ. Pilomatricoma of the head and neck: a
retrospective review of 179 cases. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2003
Dec;129(12):1327-30. doi: 10.1001/archotol.129.12.1327. Citation on PubMed Lazar AJ, Calonje E, Grayson W, Dei Tos AP, Mihm MC Jr, Redston M, McKee PH.
Pilomatrix carcinomas contain mutations in CTNNB1, the gene encoding
beta-catenin. J Cutan Pathol. 2005 Feb;32(2):148-57. doi:
10.1111/j.0303-6987.2005.00267.x. Citation on PubMed Moreno-Bueno G, Gamallo C, Perez-Gallego L, Contreras F, Palacios J.
beta-catenin expression in pilomatrixomas. Relationship with beta-catenin gene
mutations and comparison with beta-catenin expression in normal hair follicles.
Br J Dermatol. 2001 Oct;145(4):576-81. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2133.2001.04455.x. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Benign Tumors Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 1, 2012