Craniometaphyseal dysplasia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Craniometaphyseal dysplasia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/craniometaphyseal-dysplasia/ Craniometaphyseal dysplasia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Craniometaphyseal dysplasia is a rare condition characterized by thickening (overgrowth) of bones in the skull (cranium) and abnormalities in a region at the end of long bones known as the metaphysis. The abnormal bone growth continues throughout life. Except in the most severe cases, the lifespan of people with craniometaphyseal dysplasia is normal. Bone overgrowth in the head causes many of the signs and symptoms of craniometaphyseal dysplasia. Affected individuals typically have distinctive facial features such as a wide nasal bridge , a prominent forehead , wide-set eyes ( hypertelorism ), and a prominent jaw. Excess bone formation in the jaw can delay teething (dentition) or result in absent (non-erupting) teeth. Infants with craniometaphyseal dysplasia may have breathing or feeding problems caused by narrow nasal passages. In severe cases, abnormal bone growth can pinch (compress) the nerves that extend from the brain to various areas of the head and neck (cranial nerves). Compression of the cranial nerves can lead to paralyzed facial muscles (facial nerve palsy), blindness, or deafness. The x-rays of individuals with craniometaphyseal dysplasia show unusually shaped long bones, particularly long bones in the legs. The ends of these bones are wider and appear less dense than usual in people with this condition. There are two types of craniometaphyseal dysplasia, which are distinguished by their pattern of inheritance and genetic cause. They are known as the autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive types. Frequency Craniometaphyseal dysplasia is a very rare disorder; its incidence is unknown. Causes Mutations in the ANKH gene cause autosomal dominant craniometaphyseal dysplasia. The ANKH gene provides instructions for making a protein that plays a role in the development and function of cells that build bones (osteoblasts) and cells that break down bone (osteoclasts). Osteoclasts are involved in bone remodeling, a normal process in which old bone is removed and new bone is created to replace it. In addition, the ANKH protein transports a molecule called pyrophosphate out of cells. The pyrophosphate found outside of cells (extracellular pyrophosphate) helps control bone formation by preventing mineralization, the process by which minerals such as calcium and phosphorus are deposited in developing bones. The ANKH protein may have other, unknown functions. Mutations in the ANKH gene that cause autosomal dominant craniometaphyseal dysplasia impair the maturation (differentiation) of osteoclasts, which likely disrupts bone remodeling. Reduced breakdown of bone tissue can contribute to the bone thickening characteristic of craniometaphyseal dysplasia. ANKH gene mutations may also reduce the protein's ability to transport pyrophosphate out of cells. A shortage of extracellular pyrophosphate can increase bone mineralization, which may also contribute to the bone abnormalities. A mutation in the GJA1 gene causes some cases of autosomal recessive craniometaphyseal dysplasia. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called connexin 43, which is involved in the development of many tissues in the body, including bone. The protein may be involved in bone remodeling. It is unclear how a mutation in the GJA1 gene leads to the particular bone abnormalities of craniometaphyseal dysplasia. The genetic cause of many cases of autosomal recessive craniometaphyseal dysplasia is unknown. It is likely that other, unidentified genes are involved in this form of the disorder. Learn more about the genes associated with Craniometaphyseal dysplasia ANKH GJA1 Inheritance When caused by mutations in the ANKH gene, craniometaphyseal dysplasia follows an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one altered copy of the ANKH gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Individuals with autosomal dominant craniometaphyseal dysplasia typically have one parent who also has the condition. Less often, cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. When caused by mutations in the GJA1 gene, craniometaphyseal dysplasia has an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern , which means both copies of the GJA1 gene in each cell are altered. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the disorder. Other Names for This Condition Autosomal dominant craniometaphyseal dysplasia Autosomal recessive craniometaphyseal dysplasia CMD CMDD CMDJ CMDR Craniometaphyseal dysplasia, Jackson type Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Craniometaphyseal dysplasia, autosomal dominant Genetic Testing Registry: Craniometaphyseal dysplasia, autosomal recessive Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Craniometaphyseal dysplasia, autosomal dominant Craniometaphyseal dysplasia, autosomal recessive Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CRANIOMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT; CMDD Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Addison WN, Azari F, Sorensen ES, Kaartinen MT, McKee MD. Pyrophosphate
inhibits mineralization of osteoblast cultures by binding to mineral,
up-regulating osteopontin, and inhibiting alkaline phosphatase activity. J Biol
Chem. 2007 May 25;282(21):15872-83. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M701116200. Epub 2007 Mar
23. Citation on PubMed Hu Y, Chen IP, de Almeida S, Tiziani V, Do Amaral CM, Gowrishankar K,
Passos-Bueno MR, Reichenberger EJ. A novel autosomal recessive GJA1 missense
mutation linked to Craniometaphyseal dysplasia. PLoS One. 2013 Aug
12;8(8):e73576. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073576. eCollection 2013. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Iughetti P, Alonso LG, Wilcox W, Alonso N, Passos-Bueno MR. Mapping of the
autosomal recessive (AR) craniometaphyseal dysplasia locus to chromosome region
6q21-22 and confirmation of genetic heterogeneity for mild AR spondylocostal
dysplasia. Am J Med Genet. 2000 Dec 18;95(5):482-91. doi:
10.1002/1096-8628(20001218)95:53.0.co;2-x. Citation on PubMed Nurnberg P, Thiele H, Chandler D, Hohne W, Cunningham ML, Ritter H, Leschik G,
Uhlmann K, Mischung C, Harrop K, Goldblatt J, Borochowitz ZU, Kotzot D,
Westermann F, Mundlos S, Braun HS, Laing N, Tinschert S. Heterozygous mutations
in ANKH, the human ortholog of the mouse progressive ankylosis gene, result in
craniometaphyseal dysplasia. Nat Genet. 2001 May;28(1):37-41. doi:
10.1038/ng0501-37. Citation on PubMed Reichenberger E, Chen IP. Craniometaphyseal Dysplasia, Autosomal Dominant.
2007 Aug 27 [updated 2020 Jun 11]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA,
Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA):
University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1461/ Citation on PubMed Reichenberger E, Tiziani V, Watanabe S, Park L, Ueki Y, Santanna C, Baur ST,
Shiang R, Grange DK, Beighton P, Gardner J, Hamersma H, Sellars S, Ramesar R,
Lidral AC, Sommer A, Raposo do Amaral CM, Gorlin RJ, Mulliken JB, Olsen BR.
Autosomal dominant craniometaphyseal dysplasia is caused by mutations in the
transmembrane protein ANK. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Jun;68(6):1321-6. doi:
10.1086/320612. Epub 2001 Apr 16. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Talbot J, Brion R, Lamora A, Mullard M, Morice S, Heymann D, Verrecchia F.
Connexin43 intercellular communication drives the early differentiation of human
bone marrow stromal cells into osteoblasts. J Cell Physiol. 2018
Feb;233(2):946-957. doi: 10.1002/jcp.25938. Epub 2017 May 23. Citation on PubMed Zaka R, Williams CJ. Role of the progressive ankylosis gene in cartilage
mineralization. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2006 Mar;18(2):181-6. doi:
10.1097/01.bor.0000209432.36355.6e. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Bone Diseases Craniofacial Abnormalities Genetic Disorders Hearing Disorders and Deafness Vision Impairment and Blindness MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Facial paralysis Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 1, 2018