D-bifunctional protein deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → D-bifunctional protein deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/d-bifunctional-protein-deficiency/ D-bifunctional protein deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description D-bifunctional protein deficiency is a disorder that causes deterioration of nervous system functions (neurodegeneration) beginning in infancy. Newborns with D-bifunctional protein deficiency have weak muscle tone (hypotonia) and seizures. Most babies with this condition never acquire any developmental skills. Some may reach very early developmental milestones such as the ability to follow movement with their eyes or control their head movement, but they experience a gradual loss of these skills (developmental regression) within a few months. As the condition gets worse, affected children develop exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia), increased muscle tone (hypertonia), more severe and recurrent seizures (epilepsy), and loss of vision and hearing.  Most children with D-bifunctional protein deficiency do not survive past the age of 2. A small number of individuals with this disorder are somewhat less severely affected. They may acquire additional basic skills, such as voluntary hand movements or unsupported sitting, before experiencing developmental regression, and they may survive longer into childhood than more severely affected individuals. Individuals with D-bifunctional protein deficiency may have unusual facial features, including a high forehead, widely spaced eyes ( hypertelorism ), a lengthened area between the nose and mouth (philtrum), and a high arch of the hard palate at the roof of the mouth. Affected infants may also have an unusually large space between the bones of the skull (fontanelle). An enlarged liver (hepatomegaly) occurs in about half of affected individuals. Because these features are similar to those of another disorder called Zellweger syndrome (part of a group of disorders called the Zellweger spectrum ), D-bifunctional protein deficiency is sometimes called pseudo-Zellweger syndrome. Frequency D-bifunctional protein deficiency is estimated to affect 1 in 100,000 newborns. Causes D-bifunctional protein deficiency is caused by variants (also known as mutations) in the HSD17B4 gene. The protein produced from this gene (D-bifunctional protein) is an enzyme, which means that it helps specific biochemical reactions to take place. The D-bifunctional protein is found in sac-like cell structures (organelles) called peroxisomes , which contain a variety of enzymes that break down many different substances. The D-bifunctional protein is involved in the breakdown of certain molecules called fatty acids. The protein has two separate regions (domains) with enzyme activity, called the hydratase and dehydrogenase domains. These domains help carry out the second and third steps, respectively, of a process called the peroxisomal fatty acid beta-oxidation pathway. This process shortens the fatty acid molecules by two carbon atoms at a time until the fatty acids are converted to a molecule called acetyl-CoA, which is transported out of the peroxisomes for reuse by the cell. HSD17B4 gene variants that cause D-bifunctional protein deficiency can affect one or both of the protein's functions; however, this distinction does not seem to affect the severity or features of the disorder. Impairment of one or both of the protein's enzymatic activities prevents the D-bifunctional protein from breaking down fatty acids efficiently. As a result, these fatty acids accumulate in the body. It is unclear how fatty acid accumulation leads to the specific neurological and non-neurological features of D-bifunctional protein deficiency. However, the accumulation may result in abnormal development of the brain and the breakdown of myelin, which is the covering that protects nerves and promotes the efficient transmission of nerve impulses. Destruction of myelin leads to a loss of myelin-containing tissue (white matter) in the brain and spinal cord; loss of white matter is described as leukodystrophy. Abnormal brain development and leukodystrophy likely underlie the neurological abnormalities that occur in D-bifunctional protein deficiency. Learn more about the gene associated with D-bifunctional protein deficiency HSD17B4 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have variants. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition 17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase IV deficiency Bifunctional peroxisomal enzyme deficiency DBP deficiency PBFE deficiency Peroxisomal bifunctional enzyme deficiency Pseudo-Zellweger syndrome Zellweger-like syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Bifunctional peroxisomal enzyme deficiency Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Bifunctional enzyme deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM D-BIFUNCTIONAL PROTEIN DEFICIENCY Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Ferdinandusse S, Denis S, Mooyer PA, Dekker C, Duran M, Soorani-Lunsing RJ,
Boltshauser E, Macaya A, Gartner J, Majoie CB, Barth PG, Wanders RJ, Poll-The BT.
Clinical and biochemical spectrum of D-bifunctional protein deficiency. Ann
Neurol. 2006 Jan;59(1):92-104. doi: 10.1002/ana.20702. Citation on PubMed Ferdinandusse S, Ylianttila MS, Gloerich J, Koski MK, Oostheim W, Waterham HR,
Hiltunen JK, Wanders RJ, Glumoff T. Mutational spectrum of D-bifunctional protein
deficiency and structure-based genotype-phenotype analysis. Am J Hum Genet. 2006
Jan;78(1):112-24. doi: 10.1086/498880. Epub 2005 Nov 15. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central McMillan HJ, Worthylake T, Schwartzentruber J, Gottlieb CC, Lawrence SE,
Mackenzie A, Beaulieu CL, Mooyer PA; FORGE Canada Consortium; Wanders RJ,
Majewski J, Bulman DE, Geraghty MT, Ferdinandusse S, Boycott KM. Specific
combination of compound heterozygous mutations in 17beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 4 (HSD17B4) defines a new subtype of D-bifunctional protein
deficiency. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2012 Nov 22;7:90. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-90. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Moller G, van Grunsven EG, Wanders RJ, Adamski J. Molecular basis of
D-bifunctional protein deficiency. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2001 Jan
22;171(1-2):61-70. doi: 10.1016/s0303-7207(00)00388-9. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Leukodystrophies MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 17, 2023