Pallister-Hall syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Pallister-Hall syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/pallister-hall-syndrome/ Pallister-Hall syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Pallister-Hall syndrome is a disorder that affects the development of many parts of the body. Most people with this condition have extra fingers and/or toes (polydactyly), and the skin between some fingers or toes may be fused (cutaneous syndactyly). An abnormal growth in the brain called a hypothalamic hamartoma is characteristic of this disorder. In many cases, these growths do not cause any health problems; however, some hypothalamic hamartomas lead to seizures or hormone abnormalities that can be life-threatening in infancy. Other features of Pallister-Hall syndrome include a malformation of the airway called a bifid epiglottis, an obstruction of the anal opening (imperforate anus), and kidney abnormalities. Although the signs and symptoms of this disorder vary from mild to severe, only a small percentage of affected people have serious complications. Frequency This condition is very rare; its prevalence is unknown. Causes Mutations in the GLI3 gene cause Pallister-Hall syndrome. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that controls gene expression, which is a process that regulates whether genes are turned on or off in particular cells. By interacting with certain genes at specific times during development, the GLI3 protein plays a role in the normal shaping (patterning) of many organs and tissues before birth. Mutations that cause Pallister-Hall syndrome typically lead to the production of an abnormally short version of the GLI3 protein. Unlike the normal GLI3 protein, which can turn target genes on or off, the short protein can only turn off (repress) target genes. Researchers are working to determine how this change in the protein's function affects early development. It is uncertain how GLI3 mutations can cause polydactyly, hypothalamic hamartoma, and the other features of Pallister-Hall syndrome. Learn more about the gene associated with Pallister-Hall syndrome GLI3 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In some cases, an affected person inherits a mutation in the GLI3 gene from one affected parent . Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Other Names for This Condition Hall-Pallister syndrome PHS Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Pallister-Hall syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Pallister-Hall syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PALLISTER-HALL SYNDROME; PHS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Biesecker LG, Abbott M, Allen J, Clericuzio C, Feuillan P, Graham JM Jr, Hall
J, Kang S, Olney AH, Lefton D, Neri G, Peters K, Verloes A. Report from the
workshop on Pallister-Hall syndrome and related phenotypes. Am J Med Genet. 1996
Oct 2;65(1):76-81. doi:
10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19961002)65:13.0.CO;2-O. No abstract
available. Citation on PubMed Biesecker LG. GLI3-Related Pallister-Hall Syndrome. 2000 May 25
[updated 2024 Feb 22]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE,
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University
of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1465/ Citation on PubMed Boudreau EA, Liow K, Frattali CM, Wiggs E, Turner JT, Feuillan P, Sato S,
Patsalides A, Patronas N, Biesecker LG, Theodore WH. Hypothalamic hamartomas and
seizures: distinct natural history of isolated and Pallister-Hall syndrome cases.
Epilepsia. 2005 Jan;46(1):42-7. doi: 10.1111/j.0013-9580.2005.68303.x. Citation on PubMed Johnston JJ, Olivos-Glander I, Killoran C, Elson E, Turner JT, Peters KF,
Abbott MH, Aughton DJ, Aylsworth AS, Bamshad MJ, Booth C, Curry CJ, David A,
Dinulos MB, Flannery DB, Fox MA, Graham JM, Grange DK, Guttmacher AE, Hannibal
MC, Henn W, Hennekam RC, Holmes LB, Hoyme HE, Leppig KA, Lin AE, Macleod P,
Manchester DK, Marcelis C, Mazzanti L, McCann E, McDonald MT, Mendelsohn NJ,
Moeschler JB, Moghaddam B, Neri G, Newbury-Ecob R, Pagon RA, Phillips JA, Sadler
LS, Stoler JM, Tilstra D, Walsh Vockley CM, Zackai EH, Zadeh TM, Brueton L, Black
GC, Biesecker LG. Molecular and clinical analyses of Greig cephalopolysyndactyly
and Pallister-Hall syndromes: robust phenotype prediction from the type and
position of GLI3 mutations. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Apr;76(4):609-22. doi:
10.1086/429346. Epub 2005 Feb 28. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Johnston JJ, Sapp JC, Turner JT, Amor D, Aftimos S, Aleck KA, Bocian M,
Bodurtha JN, Cox GF, Curry CJ, Day R, Donnai D, Field M, Fujiwara I, Gabbett M,
Gal M, Graham JM, Hedera P, Hennekam RC, Hersh JH, Hopkin RJ, Kayserili H, Kidd
AM, Kimonis V, Lin AE, Lynch SA, Maisenbacher M, Mansour S, McGaughran J, Mehta
L, Murphy H, Raygada M, Robin NH, Rope AF, Rosenbaum KN, Schaefer GB, Shealy A,
Smith W, Soller M, Sommer A, Stalker HJ, Steiner B, Stephan MJ, Tilstra D,
Tomkins S, Trapane P, Tsai AC, Van Allen MI, Vasudevan PC, Zabel B, Zunich J,
Black GC, Biesecker LG. Molecular analysis expands the spectrum of phenotypes
associated with GLI3 mutations. Hum Mutat. 2010 Oct;31(10):1142-54. doi:
10.1002/humu.21328. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Kang S, Graham JM Jr, Olney AH, Biesecker LG. GLI3 frameshift mutations cause
autosomal dominant Pallister-Hall syndrome. Nat Genet. 1997 Mar;15(3):266-8. doi:
10.1038/ng0397-266. Citation on PubMed McCann E, Fryer AE, Craigie R, Baillie C, Ba'ath ME, Selby A, Biesecker LG.
Genitourinary malformations as a feature of the Pallister-Hall syndrome. Clin
Dysmorphol. 2006 Apr;15(2):75-9. doi: 10.1097/01.mcd.0000184972.76657.e1. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Brain Malformations Genetic Disorders Hand Injuries and Disorders Toe Injuries and Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Epiglottis (Image) Genetics Imperforate anus Polydactyly Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated November 1, 2016