Phosphoglycerate kinase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Phosphoglycerate kinase deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/phosphoglycerate-kinase-deficiency/ Phosphoglycerate kinase deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Phosphoglycerate kinase deficiency is a genetic disorder that affects the body's ability to break down the simple sugar glucose, which is the primary energy source for most cells. Researchers have described two major forms of the condition. The most common form is sometimes called the hemolytic form. It is characterized by a condition known as chronic hemolytic anemia, in which red blood cells are broken down (undergo hemolysis) prematurely. Chronic hemolytic anemia can lead to unusually pale skin (pallor), yellowing of the eyes and skin (jaundice), fatigue, shortness of breath, and a rapid heart rate. Some people with the hemolytic form also have symptoms related to abnormal brain function, including intellectual disability, seizures, and stroke. The other form of phosphoglycerate kinase deficiency is often called the myopathic form. It primarily affects muscles, causing progressive weakness, pain, and cramping, particularly with exercise. During exercise, muscle tissue can be broken down, releasing a protein called myoglobin. This protein is processed by the kidneys and released in the urine (myoglobinuria). If untreated, myoglobinuria can lead to kidney failure. Most people with phosphoglycerate kinase deficiency have either the hemolytic form or the myopathic form. However, other combinations of signs and symptoms (such as muscle weakness with neurologic symptoms) have also been reported. Frequency Phosphoglycerate kinase deficiency appears to be a rare disorder. About 30 families with affected members have been reported in the scientific literature. Causes Phosphoglycerate kinase deficiency is caused by mutations in the PGK1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called phosphoglycerate kinase, which is involved in a critical energy-producing process in cells known as glycolysis. During glycolysis, the simple sugar glucose is broken down to produce energy. Mutations in the PGK1 gene reduce the activity of phosphoglycerate kinase, which disrupts energy production and leads to cell damage or cell death. It is unclear why this abnormality preferentially affects red blood cells and brain cells in some people and muscle cells in others. Researchers speculate that different PGK1 gene mutations may have varying effects on the activity of phosphoglycerate kinase in different types of cells. Learn more about the gene associated with Phosphoglycerate kinase deficiency PGK1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern . The PGK1 gene is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes . In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Females with one altered PGK1 gene, however, may have some features of phosphoglycerate kinase deficiency, such as anemia. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons. Other Names for This Condition PGK deficiency PGK1 deficiency Phosphoglycerate kinase 1 deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Deficiency of phosphoglycerate kinase Genetic Testing Registry: Glycogen storage disease due to phosphoglycerate kinase 1 deficiency Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Glycogen storage disease due to phosphoglycerate kinase 1 deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PHOSPHOGLYCERATE KINASE 1 DEFICIENCY Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Aasly J, van Diggelen OP, Boer AM, Bronstad G. Phosphoglycerate kinase
deficiency in two brothers with McArdle-like clinical symptoms. Eur J Neurol.
2000 Jan;7(1):111-3. doi: 10.1046/j.1468-1331.2000.00012.x. Citation on PubMed Beutler E. PGK deficiency. Br J Haematol. 2007 Jan;136(1):3-11. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2141.2006.06351.x. Citation on PubMed Flanagan JM, Rhodes M, Wilson M, Beutler E. The identification of a recurrent
phosphoglycerate kinase mutation associated with chronic haemolytic anaemia and
neurological dysfunction in a family from USA. Br J Haematol. 2006
Jul;134(2):233-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2006.06143.x. Epub 2006 Jun 1. Citation on PubMed Noel N, Flanagan JM, Ramirez Bajo MJ, Kalko SG, Manu Mdel M, Garcia Fuster JL,
Perez de la Ossa P, Carreras J, Beutler E, Vives Corrons JL. Two new
phosphoglycerate kinase mutations associated with chronic haemolytic anaemia and
neurological dysfunction in two patients from Spain. Br J Haematol. 2006
Feb;132(4):523-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2005.05882.x. Erratum In: Br J
Haematol. 2006 May;133(4):451. Flanagan, John [corrected to Flanagan, Jonathan
M]; Perez de la Ossa, Pablo [added]; Carreras, Josep [added]. Citation on PubMed Sotiriou E, Greene P, Krishna S, Hirano M, DiMauro S. Myopathy and
parkinsonism in phosphoglycerate kinase deficiency. Muscle Nerve. 2010
May;41(5):707-10. doi: 10.1002/mus.21612. Citation on PubMed Spiegel R, Gomez EA, Akman HO, Krishna S, Horovitz Y, DiMauro S. Myopathic
form of phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK) deficiency: a new case and pathogenic
considerations. Neuromuscul Disord. 2009 Mar;19(3):207-11. doi:
10.1016/j.nmd.2008.12.004. Epub 2009 Jan 20. Citation on PubMed Svaasand EK, Aasly J, Landsem VM, Klungland H. Altered expression of PGK1 in a
family with phosphoglycerate kinase deficiency. Muscle Nerve. 2007
Nov;36(5):679-84. doi: 10.1002/mus.20859. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Anemia Carbohydrate Metabolism Disorders Genetic Brain Disorders Genetic Disorders Muscle Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Hemolytic anemia Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 1, 2011