Congenital hyperinsulinism: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Congenital hyperinsulinism URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/congenital-hyperinsulinism/ Congenital hyperinsulinism To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Congenital hyperinsulinism is a condition that causes individuals to have abnormally high levels of insulin. Insulin is a hormone that helps control levels of blood glucose, also called blood sugar. People with this condition have frequent episodes of low blood glucose (hypoglycemia). In infants and young children, these episodes are characterized by a lack of energy (lethargy), irritability, or difficulty feeding. Repeated episodes of low blood glucose increase the risk for serious complications such as breathing difficulties, seizures, intellectual disability, vision loss, brain damage, and coma. The severity of congenital hyperinsulinism varies widely among affected individuals, even among members of the same family. About 60 percent of infants with this condition experience a hypoglycemic episode within the first month of life. Other affected children develop hypoglycemia by early childhood. Unlike typical episodes of hypoglycemia, which occur most often after periods without food (fasting) or after exercising, episodes of hypoglycemia in people with congenital hyperinsulinism can also occur after eating. Frequency Congenital hyperinsulinism affects approximately 1 in 50,000 newborns. This condition is more common in certain populations, affecting up to 1 in 2,500 newborns. Causes Congenital hyperinsulinism is caused by mutations in genes that regulate the release (secretion) of insulin, which is produced by beta cells in the pancreas . Insulin clears excess  glucose from the bloodstream by passing glucose into cells to be used as energy. Gene mutations that cause congenital hyperinsulinism lead to over-secretion of insulin from beta cells. Normally, insulin is secreted in response to the amount of glucose in the bloodstream: when glucose levels rise, so does insulin secretion . However, in people with congenital hyperinsulinism, insulin is secreted from beta cells regardless of the amount of glucose present in the blood. This excessive secretion of insulin results in glucose being rapidly removed from the bloodstream and passed into tissues such as muscle, liver, and fat. A lack of glucose in the blood results in frequent states of hypoglycemia in people with congenital hyperinsulinism. Insufficient blood glucose also deprives the brain of its primary source of fuel. Mutations in at least nine genes have been found to cause congenital hyperinsulinism. Mutations in the ABCC8 gene are the most common known cause of the disorder. They account for this condition in approximately 40 percent of affected individuals. Less frequently, mutations in the KCNJ11 gene have been found in people with congenital hyperinsulinism. Mutations in each of the other genes associated with this condition account for only a small percentage of cases. In approximately half of people with congenital hyperinsulinism, the cause is unknown. Learn more about the genes associated with Congenital hyperinsulinism ABCC8 GCK HADH HNF1A HNF4A KCNJ11 Additional Information from NCBI Gene: GLUD1 SLC16A1 UCP2 Inheritance Congenital hyperinsulinism can have different inheritance patterns, usually depending on the form of the condition. At least two forms of the condition have been identified. The most common form is the diffuse form, which occurs when all of the beta cells in the pancreas secrete too much insulin. The focal form of congenital hyperinsulinism occurs when only some of the beta cells over-secrete insulin. Most often, the diffuse form of congenital hyperinsulinism is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Less frequently, the diffuse form is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. The inheritance of the focal form of congenital hyperinsulinism is more complex. For most genes, both copies are turned on (active) in all cells, but for a small subset of genes, one of the two copies is turned off (inactive). Most people with the focal form of this condition inherit one copy of the mutated, inactive gene from their unaffected father. During embryonic development, a mutation occurs in the other, active copy of the gene. This second mutation is found within only some cells in the pancreas. As a result, some pancreatic beta cells have abnormal insulin secretion, while other beta cells function normally. Other Names for This Condition Hyperinsulinemia hypoglycemia of infancy Infancy hyperinsulinemia hypoglycemia Neonatal hyperinsulinism Persistent hyperinsulinemia hypoglycemia of infancy Persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia PHHI hypoglycemia Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Exercise-induced hyperinsulinism Genetic Testing Registry: Familial hyperinsulinism Genetic Testing Registry: Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia, familial, 2 Genetic Testing Registry: Hyperinsulinism due to INSR deficiency Genetic Testing Registry: Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia, familial, 1 Genetic Testing Registry: Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia, familial, 4 Genetic Testing Registry: Hyperinsulinism due to glucokinase deficiency Genetic Testing Registry: Hyperinsulinism-hyperammonemia syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Congenital isolated hyperinsulinism Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM HYPERINSULINEMIC HYPOGLYCEMIA, FAMILIAL, 1; HHF1 HYPERINSULINEMIC HYPOGLYCEMIA, FAMILIAL, 2; HHF2 HYPERINSULINEMIC HYPOGLYCEMIA, FAMILIAL, 3; HHF3 HYPERINSULINEMIC HYPOGLYCEMIA, FAMILIAL, 6; HHF6 HYPERINSULINEMIC HYPOGLYCEMIA, FAMILIAL, 5; HHF5 HYPERINSULINEMIC HYPOGLYCEMIA, FAMILIAL, 4; HHF4 HYPERINSULINEMIC HYPOGLYCEMIA, FAMILIAL, 7; HHF7 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Huopio H, Shyng SL, Otonkoski T, Nichols CG. K(ATP) channels and insulin
secretion disorders. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Aug;283(2):E207-16. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00047.2002. Citation on PubMed James C, Kapoor RR, Ismail D, Hussain K. The genetic basis of congenital
hyperinsulinism. J Med Genet. 2009 May;46(5):289-99. doi:
10.1136/jmg.2008.064337. Epub 2009 Mar 1. Citation on PubMed Kapoor RR, James C, Hussain K. Advances in the diagnosis and management of
hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia. Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab. 2009
Feb;5(2):101-12. doi: 10.1038/ncpendmet1046. Erratum In: Nat Clin Pract
Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Mar;5(3):180. Citation on PubMed Meissner T, Wendel U, Burgard P, Schaetzle S, Mayatepek E. Long-term follow-up
of 114 patients with congenital hyperinsulinism. Eur J Endocrinol. 2003
Jul;149(1):43-51. doi: 10.1530/eje.0.1490043. Citation on PubMed Mohamed Z, Arya VB, Hussain K. Hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia:genetic
mechanisms, diagnosis and management. J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol. 2012
Dec;4(4):169-81. doi: 10.4274/jcrpe.821. Epub 2012 Oct 2. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Pinney SE, MacMullen C, Becker S, Lin YW, Hanna C, Thornton P, Ganguly A,
Shyng SL, Stanley CA. Clinical characteristics and biochemical mechanisms of
congenital hyperinsulinism associated with dominant KATP channel mutations. J
Clin Invest. 2008 Aug;118(8):2877-86. doi: 10.1172/JCI35414. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Sandal T, Laborie LB, Brusgaard K, Eide SA, Christesen HB, Sovik O, Njolstad
PR, Molven A. The spectrum of ABCC8 mutations in Norwegian patients with
congenital hyperinsulinism of infancy. Clin Genet. 2009 May;75(5):440-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-0004.2009.01152.x. Citation on PubMed Snider KE, Becker S, Boyajian L, Shyng SL, MacMullen C, Hughes N, Ganapathy K,
Bhatti T, Stanley CA, Ganguly A. Genotype and phenotype correlations in 417
children with congenital hyperinsulinism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013
Feb;98(2):E355-63. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-2169. Epub 2012 Dec 28. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Hypoglycemia Metabolic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Low blood sugar - newborns Related Medical Tests Insulin in Blood Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated January 1, 2014