Complement component 2 deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Complement component 2 deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/complement-component-2-deficiency/ Complement component 2 deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Complement component 2 deficiency is a disorder that causes the immune system to malfunction, resulting in a form of immunodeficiency. Immunodeficiencies are conditions in which the immune system is not able to protect the body effectively from foreign invaders such as bacteria and viruses. People with complement component 2 deficiency have a significantly increased risk of recurrent bacterial infections, specifically of the lungs (pneumonia), the membrane covering the brain and spinal cord (meningitis), and the blood ( sepsis ), which may be life-threatening. These infections most commonly occur in infancy and childhood and become less frequent in adolescence and adulthood. Complement component 2 deficiency is also associated with an increased risk of developing autoimmune disorders such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) or vasculitis. Autoimmune disorders occur when the immune system malfunctions and attacks the body's tissues and organs. Between 10 and 20 percent of individuals with complement component 2 deficiency develop SLE. Females with complement component 2 deficiency are more likely to have SLE than affected males, but this is also true of SLE in the general population. The severity of complement component 2 deficiency varies widely. While some affected individuals experience recurrent infections and other immune system difficulties, others do not have any health problems related to the disorder. Frequency In Western countries, complement component 2 deficiency is estimated to affect 1 in 20,000 individuals; its prevalence in other areas of the world is unknown. Causes Complement component 2 deficiency is caused by mutations in the C2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making the complement component 2 protein, which helps regulate a part of the body's immune response known as the complement system . The complement system is a group of proteins that work together to destroy foreign invaders, trigger inflammation, and remove debris from cells and tissues. The complement component 2 protein is involved in the pathway that turns on (activates) the complement system when foreign invaders, such as bacteria, are detected. The most common C2 gene mutation, which is found in more than 90 percent of people with complement component 2 deficiency, prevents the production of complement component 2 protein. A lack of this protein impairs activation of the complement pathway. As a result, the complement system's ability to fight infections is diminished. It is unclear how complement component 2 deficiency leads to an increase in autoimmune disorders. Researchers speculate that the dysfunctional complement system is unable to distinguish what it should attack, and it sometimes attacks normal tissues, leading to autoimmunity.  Alternatively, the dysfunctional complement system may perform partial attacks on invading molecules, which leaves behind foreign fragments that are difficult to distinguish from the body's tissues, so the complement system sometimes attacks the body's own cells. It is likely that other factors, both genetic and environmental, play a role in the variability of the signs and symptoms of complement component 2 deficiency. Learn more about the gene associated with Complement component 2 deficiency C2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition C2 deficiency C2D Complement 2 deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Complement component 2 deficiency Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Complement component 2 deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM COMPLEMENT COMPONENT 2 DEFICIENCY; C2D Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Jonsson G, Sjoholm AG, Truedsson L, Bengtsson AA, Braconier JH, Sturfelt G.
Rheumatological manifestations, organ damage and autoimmunity in hereditary C2
deficiency. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2007 Jul;46(7):1133-9. doi:
10.1093/rheumatology/kem023. Epub 2007 May 3. Citation on PubMed Jonsson G, Truedsson L, Sturfelt G, Oxelius VA, Braconier JH, Sjoholm AG.
Hereditary C2 deficiency in Sweden: frequent occurrence of invasive infection,
atherosclerosis, and rheumatic disease. Medicine (Baltimore). 2005
Jan;84(1):23-34. doi: 10.1097/01.md.0000152371.22747.1e. Citation on PubMed Sjoholm AG, Jonsson G, Braconier JH, Sturfelt G, Truedsson L. Complement
deficiency and disease: an update. Mol Immunol. 2006 Jan;43(1-2):78-85. doi:
10.1016/j.molimm.2005.06.025. Citation on PubMed Skattum L, van Deuren M, van der Poll T, Truedsson L. Complement deficiency
states and associated infections. Mol Immunol. 2011 Aug;48(14):1643-55. doi:
10.1016/j.molimm.2011.05.001. Epub 2011 May 31. Citation on PubMed Truedsson L, Bengtsson AA, Sturfelt G. Complement deficiencies and systemic
lupus erythematosus. Autoimmunity. 2007 Dec;40(8):560-6. doi:
10.1080/08916930701510673. Citation on PubMed Wen L, Atkinson JP, Giclas PC. Clinical and laboratory evaluation of
complement deficiency. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2004 Apr;113(4):585-93; quiz 594.
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2004.02.003. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Immune System and Disorders Lupus MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Complement Genetics Immunodeficiency disorders Related Medical Tests Complement Blood Test Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 1, 2014