Tubular aggregate myopathy: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Tubular aggregate myopathy URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/tubular-aggregate-myopathy/ Tubular aggregate myopathy To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Tubular aggregate myopathy is a disorder that primarily affects the skeletal muscles, which are muscles the body uses for movement. This disorder causes muscle pain, cramping, or weakness that begins in childhood and worsens over time. The muscles of the lower limbs are most often affected, although the upper limbs can also be involved. Affected individuals can have difficulty running, climbing stairs, or getting up from a squatting position. The weakness may also lead to an unusual walking style (gait). Some people with this condition develop joint deformities (contractures) in the arms and legs. Skeletal muscles are normally made up of two types of fibers, called type I and type II fibers, in approximately equal quantities. Type I fibers, also called slow twitch fibers, are used for long, sustained activity, such as walking long distances. Type II fibers, also known as fast twitch fibers, are used for short bursts of strength, which are needed for activities such as running up stairs or sprinting. In people with tubular aggregate myopathy, type II fibers waste away (atrophy), so affected individuals have mostly type I fibers. In addition, proteins build up abnormally in both type I and type II fibers, forming clumps of tube-like structures called tubular aggregates. Tubular aggregates can occur in other muscle disorders, but they are the primary muscle cell abnormality in tubular aggregate myopathy. Frequency Tubular aggregate myopathy is a rare disorder. Its prevalence is unknown. Causes Tubular aggregate myopathy can be caused by mutations in the STIM1 gene. The protein produced from this gene is involved in controlling the entry of positively charged calcium atoms (calcium ions) into cells. The STIM1 protein recognizes when calcium ion levels are low and stimulates the flow of ions into the cell through special channels in the cell membrane called calcium-release activated calcium (CRAC) channels. In muscle cells, the activation of CRAC channels by STIM1 is thought to help replenish calcium stores in a structure called the sarcoplasmic reticulum . STIM1 may also be involved in the release of calcium ions from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. This release of ions stimulates muscle tensing (contraction). The STIM1 gene mutations involved in tubular aggregate myopathy lead to production of a STIM1 protein that is constantly turned on (constitutively active), which means it continually stimulates calcium ion entry through CRAC channels regardless of ion levels. It is unknown how constitutively active STIM1 leads to the muscle weakness characteristic of tubular aggregate myopathy. Evidence suggests that the tubular aggregates are composed of proteins that are normally part of the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Although the mechanism is unknown, some researchers speculate that the aggregates are the result of uncontrolled calcium levels in muscle cells, possibly due to abnormal STIM1 activity. Mutations in other genes, some of which have not been identified, are also thought to cause some cases of tubular aggregate myopathy. Learn more about the gene associated with Tubular aggregate myopathy STIM1 Additional Information from NCBI Gene: ORAI1 Inheritance Most cases of tubular aggregate myopathy, including those caused by STIM1 gene mutations, are inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. Autosomal dominant inheritance means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In some cases, the mutation is passed through generations in a family . Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Rarely, tubular aggregate myopathy is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of a gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Researchers are still working to determine which gene or genes are associated with autosomal recessive tubular aggregate myopathy. Other Names for This Condition Myopathy with tubular aggregates TAM Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Myopathy, tubular aggregate, 1 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Tubular aggregate myopathy Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MYOPATHY, TUBULAR AGGREGATE, 1; TAM1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bohm J, Chevessier F, Maues De Paula A, Koch C, Attarian S, Feger C, Hantai D,
Laforet P, Ghorab K, Vallat JM, Fardeau M, Figarella-Branger D, Pouget J, Romero
NB, Koch M, Ebel C, Levy N, Krahn M, Eymard B, Bartoli M, Laporte J. Constitutive
activation of the calcium sensor STIM1 causes tubular-aggregate myopathy. Am J
Hum Genet. 2013 Feb 7;92(2):271-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.12.007. Epub 2013 Jan
17. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Chevessier F, Bauche-Godard S, Leroy JP, Koenig J, Paturneau-Jouas M, Eymard
B, Hantai D, Verdiere-Sahuque M. The origin of tubular aggregates in human
myopathies. J Pathol. 2005 Nov;207(3):313-23. doi: 10.1002/path.1832. Citation on PubMed Endo Y, Noguchi S, Hara Y, Hayashi YK, Motomura K, Miyatake S, Murakami N,
Tanaka S, Yamashita S, Kizu R, Bamba M, Goto Y, Matsumoto N, Nonaka I, Nishino I.
Dominant mutations in ORAI1 cause tubular aggregate myopathy with hypocalcemia
via constitutive activation of store-operated Ca(2)(+) channels. Hum Mol Genet. 2015
Feb 1;24(3):637-48. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu477. Epub 2014 Sep 16. Citation on PubMed Hedberg C, Niceta M, Fattori F, Lindvall B, Ciolfi A, D'Amico A, Tasca G,
Petrini S, Tulinius M, Tartaglia M, Oldfors A, Bertini E. Childhood onset tubular
aggregate myopathy associated with de novo STIM1 mutations. J Neurol. 2014
May;261(5):870-6. doi: 10.1007/s00415-014-7287-x. Epub 2014 Feb 26. Citation on PubMed Lee KJ, Hyun C, Woo JS, Park CS, Kim DH, Lee EH. Stromal interaction molecule
1 (STIM1) regulates sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2)(+)-ATPase 1a (SERCA1a)
in skeletal muscle. Pflugers Arch. 2014 May;466(5):987-1001. doi:
10.1007/s00424-013-1361-6. Citation on PubMed Lee KJ, Woo JS, Hwang JH, Hyun C, Cho CH, Kim DH, Lee EH. STIM1 negatively
regulates Ca(2)(+) release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum in skeletal myotubes.
Biochem J. 2013 Jul 15;453(2):187-200. doi: 10.1042/BJ20130178. Citation on PubMed Nesin V, Wiley G, Kousi M, Ong EC, Lehmann T, Nicholl DJ, Suri M, Shahrizaila
N, Katsanis N, Gaffney PM, Wierenga KJ, Tsiokas L. Activating mutations in STIM1
and ORAI1 cause overlapping syndromes of tubular myopathy and congenital miosis.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Mar 18;111(11):4197-202. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1312520111. Epub 2014 Mar 3. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Muscle Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 1, 2017