Biotinidase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Biotinidase deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/biotinidase-deficiency/ Biotinidase deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Biotinidase deficiency is an inherited disorder in which the body is unable to recycle the vitamin biotin. If this condition is not recognized and treated, its signs and symptoms typically appear within the first few months of life, although it can also become apparent later in childhood. Profound biotinidase deficiency, the more severe form of the condition, can cause seizures, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), breathing problems, hearing and vision loss, problems with movement and balance (ataxia), skin rashes, hair loss (alopecia), and a fungal infection called candidiasis. Affected children also have delayed development. Lifelong treatment can prevent these complications from occurring or improve them if they have already developed. Partial biotinidase deficiency is a milder form of this condition. Without treatment, affected children may experience hypotonia, skin rashes, and hair loss, but these problems may appear only during illness, infection, or other times of stress. Frequency Profound or partial biotinidase deficiency occurs in approximately 1 in 60,000 newborns Causes Mutations in the BTD gene cause biotinidase deficiency. The BTD gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called biotinidase. This enzyme recycles biotin, a B vitamin found in foods such as liver, egg yolks, and milk. Biotinidase removes biotin that is bound to proteins in food, leaving the vitamin in its free (unbound) state. Free biotin is needed by enzymes called biotin-dependent carboxylases to break down fats, proteins, and carbohydrates. Because several of these enzymes are impaired in biotinidase deficiency, the condition is considered a form of multiple carboxylase deficiency. Mutations in the BTD gene reduce or eliminate the activity of biotinidase. Profound biotinidase deficiency results when the activity of biotinidase is reduced to less than 10 percent of normal. Partial biotinidase deficiency occurs when biotinidase activity is reduced to between 10 percent and 30 percent of normal. Without enough of this enzyme, biotin cannot be recycled. The resulting shortage of free biotin impairs the activity of biotin-dependent carboxylases, leading to a buildup of potentially toxic compounds in the body. If the condition is not treated promptly, this buildup damages various cells and tissues, causing the signs and symptoms described above. Learn more about the gene associated with Biotinidase deficiency BTD Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the BTD gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with biotinidase deficiency each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not have any health problems associated with the condition. Other Names for This Condition BIOT BTD deficiency Carboxylase deficiency, multiple, late-onset Late-onset biotin-responsive multiple carboxylase deficiency Late-onset multiple carboxylase deficiency Multiple carboxylase deficiency, late-onset Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Biotinidase deficiency Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Biotinidase deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM BIOTINIDASE DEFICIENCY Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Dobrowolski SF, Angeletti J, Banas RA, Naylor EW. Real time PCR assays to
detect common mutations in the biotinidase gene and application of mutational
analysis to newborn screening for biotinidase deficiency. Mol Genet Metab. 2003
Feb;78(2):100-7. doi: 10.1016/s1096-7192(02)00231-7. Citation on PubMed Sivri HS, Genc GA, Tokatli A, Dursun A, Coskun T, Aydin HI, Sennaroglu L,
Belgin E, Jensen K, Wolf B. Hearing loss in biotinidase deficiency:
genotype-phenotype correlation. J Pediatr. 2007 Apr;150(4):439-42. doi:
10.1016/j.jpeds.2007.01.036. Erratum In: J Pediatr. 2007 Aug;151(2):222. Tokatly,
Aysegul [corrected to Tokatli, Aysegul]; Aydyn, Halil Ybrahim [corrected to
Aydin, Halil Ibrahim]. Citation on PubMed Wolf B. Biotinidase Deficiency. 2000 Mar 24 [updated 2023 May 25]. In: Adam
MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington,
Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1322/ Citation on PubMed Wolf B. Biotinidase deficiency: "if you have to have an inherited metabolic
disease, this is the one to have". Genet Med. 2012 Jun;14(6):565-75. doi:
10.1038/gim.2011.6. Epub 2012 Jan 5. Citation on PubMed Wolf B. Clinical issues and frequent questions about biotinidase deficiency.
Mol Genet Metab. 2010 May;100(1):6-13. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.01.003. Epub
2010 Jan 11. Citation on PubMed Wolf B. The neurology of biotinidase deficiency. Mol Genet Metab. 2011
Sep-Oct;104(1-2):27-34. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2011.06.001. Epub 2011 Jun 12. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Brain Disorders Genetic Disorders Metabolic Disorders Newborn Screening MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Pantothenic acid and biotin Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 1, 2014