Diastrophic dysplasia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Diastrophic dysplasia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/diastrophic-dysplasia/ Diastrophic dysplasia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Diastrophic dysplasia is a disorder of cartilage and bone development. Affected individuals have short stature with very short arms and legs. Most also have early-onset joint pain ( osteoarthritis ) and joint deformities called contractures, which restrict movement. These joint problems often make it difficult to walk and tend to worsen with age. Additional features of diastrophic dysplasia include an inward- and upward-turning foot ( clubfoot ), progressive abnormal curvature of the spine, and unusually positioned thumbs (hitchhiker thumbs). About half of infants with diastrophic dysplasia are born with an opening in the roof of the mouth (a cleft palate ). Swelling of the external ears is also common in newborns and can lead to thickened, deformed ears. The signs and symptoms of diastrophic dysplasia are similar to those of another skeletal disorder called atelosteogenesis type 2 ; however, diastrophic dysplasia tends to be less severe. Although some affected infants have breathing problems, most people with diastrophic dysplasia live into adulthood. Frequency Although the exact prevalence of diastrophic dysplasia is unknown, researchers estimate that it affects about 1 in 500,000 newborns in the United States. This condition is more common in Finland, where it affects about 1 in 33,000 newborns. Causes Diastrophic dysplasia is one of several skeletal disorders caused by mutations in the SLC26A2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is essential for the normal development of cartilage and for its conversion to bone. Cartilage is a tough, flexible tissue that makes up much of the skeleton during early development. Most cartilage is later converted to bone, except for the cartilage that continues to cover and protect the ends of bones and is present in the nose and external ears. Mutations in the SLC26A2 gene alter the structure of developing cartilage, preventing bones from forming properly and resulting in the skeletal problems characteristic of diastrophic dysplasia. Learn more about the gene associated with Diastrophic dysplasia SLC26A2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Diastrophic dwarfism DTD Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Diastrophic dysplasia Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Diastrophic dysplasia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM DIASTROPHIC DYSPLASIA; DTD Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Canto MJ, Buixeda M, Palau J, Ojeda F. Early ultrasonographic diagnosis of
diastrophic dysplasia at 12 weeks of gestation in a fetus without previous family
history. Prenat Diagn. 2007 Oct;27(10):976-8. doi: 10.1002/pd.1800. No abstract
available. Citation on PubMed Honorio JC, Bruns RF, Grundtner LF, Raskin S, Ferrari LP, Araujo Junior E,
Nardozza LM. Diastrophic dysplasia: prenatal diagnosis and review of the
literature. Sao Paulo Med J. 2013;131(2):127-32. doi:
10.1590/s1516-31802013000100024. Citation on PubMed Remes V, Poussa M, Lonnqvist T, Puusa A, Tervahartiala P, Helenius I, Peltonen
J. Walking ability in patients with diastrophic dysplasia: a clinical,
electroneurophysiological, treadmill, and MRI analysis. J Pediatr Orthop. 2004
Sep-Oct;24(5):546-51. doi: 10.1097/00004694-200409000-00016. Citation on PubMed Rossi A, Superti-Furga A. Mutations in the diastrophic dysplasia sulfate
transporter (DTDST) gene (SLC26A2): 22 novel mutations, mutation review,
associated skeletal phenotypes, and diagnostic relevance. Hum Mutat. 2001
Mar;17(3):159-71. doi: 10.1002/humu.1. Erratum In: Hum Mutat 2001;18(1):82. Citation on PubMed Unger S, Superti-Furga A. Diastrophic Dysplasia. 2004 Nov 15 [updated 2023 Mar
16]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington,
Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1350/ Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Bone Diseases Dwarfism Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 1, 2020