Fish-eye disease: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Fish-eye disease URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/fish-eye-disease/ Fish-eye disease To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Fish-eye disease, also called partial LCAT deficiency, is a disorder that causes the clear front surface of the eyes (the corneas) to gradually become cloudy. The cloudiness, which generally first appears in adolescence or early adulthood, consists of small grayish dots of cholesterol (opacities) distributed across the corneas. Cholesterol is a waxy, fat-like substance that is produced in the body and obtained from foods that come from animals; it aids in many functions of the body but can become harmful in excessive amounts. As fish-eye disease progresses, the corneal cloudiness worsens and can lead to severely impaired vision. Frequency Fish-eye disease is a rare disorder. Approximately 30 cases have been reported in the medical literature. Causes Fish-eye disease is caused by mutations in the LCAT gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT). The LCAT enzyme plays a role in removing cholesterol from the blood and tissues by helping it attach to molecules called lipoproteins, which carry it to the liver. Once in the liver, the cholesterol is redistributed to other tissues or removed from the body. The enzyme has two major functions, called  alpha- and beta-LCAT activity. Alpha-LCAT activity helps attach cholesterol to a lipoprotein called high-density lipoprotein (HDL). Beta-LCAT activity helps attach cholesterol to other lipoproteins called very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) and low-density lipoprotein (LDL). LCAT gene mutations that cause fish-eye disease impair alpha-LCAT activity, reducing the enzyme's ability to attach cholesterol to HDL. Impairment of this mechanism for reducing cholesterol in the body leads to cholesterol-containing opacities in the corneas. It is not known why the cholesterol deposits affect only the corneas in this disorder. Mutations that affect both alpha-LCAT activity and beta-LCAT activity lead to a related disorder called complete LCAT deficiency , which involves corneal opacities in combination with features affecting other parts of the body. Learn more about the gene associated with Fish-eye disease LCAT Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Alpha-LCAT deficiency Alpha-lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase deficiency Dyslipoproteinemic corneal dystrophy FED LCATA deficiency Partial LCAT deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Fish-eye disease Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Fish-eye disease Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM FISH-EYE DISEASE; FED Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Calabresi L, Pisciotta L, Costantin A, Frigerio I, Eberini I, Alessandrini P,
Arca M, Bon GB, Boscutti G, Busnach G, Frasca G, Gesualdo L, Gigante M,
Lupattelli G, Montali A, Pizzolitto S, Rabbone I, Rolleri M, Ruotolo G, Sampietro
T, Sessa A, Vaudo G, Cantafora A, Veglia F, Calandra S, Bertolini S, Franceschini
G. The molecular basis of lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase deficiency
syndromes: a comprehensive study of molecular and biochemical findings in 13
unrelated Italian families. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2005 Sep;25(9):1972-8.
doi: 10.1161/01.ATV.0000175751.30616.13. Epub 2005 Jun 30. Citation on PubMed Contacos C, Sullivan DR, Rye KA, Funke H, Assmann G. A new molecular defect in
the lecithin: cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) gene associated with fish eye
disease. J Lipid Res. 1996 Jan;37(1):35-44. Citation on PubMed Kuivenhoven JA, Stalenhoef AF, Hill JS, Demacker PN, Errami A, Kastelein JJ,
Pritchard PH. Two novel molecular defects in the LCAT gene are associated with
fish eye disease. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 1996 Feb;16(2):294-303. doi:
10.1161/01.atv.16.2.294. Citation on PubMed Reshetnyak Y, Tchedre KT, Nair MP, Pritchard PH, Lacko AG. Structural
differences between wild-type and fish eye disease mutant of lecithin:cholesterol
acyltransferase. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2006 Aug;24(1):75-82. doi:
10.1080/07391102.2006.10507101. Citation on PubMed Savel J, Lafitte M, Pucheu Y, Pradeau V, Tabarin A, Couffinhal T. Very low
levels of HDL cholesterol and atherosclerosis, a variable relationship--a review
of LCAT deficiency. Vasc Health Risk Manag. 2012;8:357-61. doi:
10.2147/VHRM.S29985. Epub 2012 Jun 5. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Winder AF, Owen JS, Pritchard PH, Lloyd-Jones D, Vallance DT, White P, Wray R.
A first British case of fish-eye disease presenting at age 75 years: a double
heterozygote for defined and new mutations affecting LCAT structure and
expression. J Clin Pathol. 1999 Mar;52(3):228-30. doi: 10.1136/jcp.52.3.228. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Corneal Disorders Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Corneal transplant Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2013