GM2 activator deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → GM2 activator deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/gm2-activator-deficiency/ GM2 activator deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description GM2 activator deficiency (sometimes called GM2 gangliosidosis, AB variant) is a rare inherited disorder that causes progressive brain injury. Most individuals with GM2 activator deficiency have the acute infantile form of the disease.  Signs and symptoms of acute infantile GM2 activator deficiency typically appear between the ages of 4 and 12 months, when development slows and the muscles used for movement weaken. Infants with acute infantile GM2 activator deficiency stop achieving normal developmental milestones and eventually lose previously acquired skills such as turning over, sitting, and crawling. These infants also develop an exaggerated startle reaction to loud noises. Over time, infants with acute infantile GM2 activator deficiency typically experience seizures, vision loss, and intellectual disabilites. They eventually become unable to respond to their environment. An eye abnormality called a cherry-red spot, which can be identified with an eye examination, is characteristic of the infantile form of this disorder. Infants with acute infantile GM2 activator deficiency may survive into early childhood. Some people with GM2 activator deficiency  may develop milder and more variable signs and symptoms later in life. Due to the rarity of this condition, the full spectrum of the late-onset presentation has not been clearly defined. Frequency GM2 activator deficiency is extremely rare; fewer than 30 cases have been reported worldwide. Causes Variants (also called mutations) in the GM2A gene cause GM2 activator deficiency.  The GM2A gene provides instructions for making a protein called the ganglioside GM2 activator. This protein is required for the normal function of an enzyme called beta-hexosaminidase A. Beta-hexosaminidase A and the ganglioside GM2 activator protein work together in lysosomes , which are compartments in the cell that digest and recycle different types of molecules. Within lysosomes, the activator protein binds to a fatty substance called GM2 ganglioside and presents it to beta-hexosaminidase A to be broken down. Variants in the GM2A gene disrupt the activity of the ganglioside GM2 activator, which prevents beta-hexosaminidase A from breaking down GM2 ganglioside.  As a result, this substance accumulates in the body, particularly in the central nervous system. Over time, damage caused by the buildup of GM2 ganglioside leads to the typical signs and symptoms of  GM2 activator deficiency. Because GM2 activator deficiency  impairs the function of a lysosomal enzyme and involves the buildup of GM2 ganglioside, this condition is sometimes referred to as a lysosomal storage disorder or a GM2-gangliosidosis. Learn more about the gene associated with GM2 activator deficiency GM2A Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell must have a variant to cause the disorder. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition GM2 gangliosidosis, AB variant Hexosaminidase activator deficiency Tay-Sachs disease, AB variant Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Tay-Sachs disease, variant AB Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center GM2-gangliosidosis, B, B1, AB variant Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM GM2-GANGLIOSIDOSIS, AB VARIANT Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Chen B, Rigat B, Curry C, Mahuran DJ. Structure of the GM2A gene:
identification of an exon 2 nonsense mutation and a naturally occurring
transcript with an in-frame deletion of exon 2. Am J Hum Genet. 1999
Jul;65(1):77-87. doi: 10.1086/302463. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Ganne B, Dauriat B, Richard L, Lamari F, Ghorab K, Magy L, Benkirane M, Perani
A, Marquet V, Calvas P, Yardin C, Bourthoumieu S. GM2 gangliosidosis AB variant:
first case of late onset and review of the literature. Neurol Sci. 2022
Nov;43(11):6517-6527. doi: 10.1007/s10072-022-06270-x. Epub 2022 Aug 4. Citation on PubMed Mahuran DJ. Biochemical consequences of mutations causing the GM2
gangliosidoses. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Oct 8;1455(2-3):105-38. doi:
10.1016/s0925-4439(99)00074-5. Citation on PubMed Martins C, Brunel-Guitton C, Lortie A, Gauvin F, Morales CR, Mitchell GA,
Pshezhetsky AV. Atypical juvenile presentation of GM2 gangliosidosis
AB in a patient compound-heterozygote for c.259G > T and c.164C > T
mutations in the GM2A gene. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2017 Apr 7;11:24-29.
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2017.01.017. eCollection 2017 Jun. Citation on PubMed Sakuraba H, Itoh K, Shimmoto M, Utsumi K, Kase R, Hashimoto Y, Ozawa T, Ohwada
Y, Imataka G, Eguchi M, Furukawa T, Schepers U, Sandhoff K. GM2 gangliosidosis AB
variant: clinical and biochemical studies of a Japanese patient. Neurology. 1999
Jan 15;52(2):372-7. doi: 10.1212/wnl.52.2.372. Citation on PubMed Salih MA, Seidahmed MZ, El Khashab HY, Hamad MH, Bosley TM, Burn S, Myers A,
Landsverk ML, Crotwell PL, Bilguvar K, Mane S, Kruer MC. Mutation in GM2A Leads
to a Progressive Chorea-dementia Syndrome. Tremor Other Hyperkinet Mov (N Y).
2015 Jul 9;5:306. doi: 10.7916/D8D21WQ0. eCollection 2015. Citation on PubMed Schepers U, Glombitza G, Lemm T, Hoffmann A, Chabas A, Ozand P, Sandhoff K.
Molecular analysis of a GM2-activator deficiency in two patients with
GM2-gangliosidosis AB variant. Am J Hum Genet. 1996 Nov;59(5):1048-56. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Xiao C, Toro C, Tifft C. GM2 Activator Deficiency. 2022 Aug 25. In: Adam MP,
Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington,
Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK583219/ Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Degenerative Nerve Diseases Genetic Disorders Tay-Sachs Disease MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 28, 2024