Mucolipidosis III gamma: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Mucolipidosis III gamma URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/mucolipidosis-iii-gamma/ Mucolipidosis III gamma To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Mucolipidosis III gamma is a slowly progressive disorder that affects many parts of the body. Signs and symptoms of this condition typically appear around age 3. Individuals with mucolipidosis III gamma grow slowly and have short stature. They also have stiff joints and dysostosis multiplex, which refers to multiple skeletal abnormalities seen on x-ray. Many affected individuals develop low bone mineral density ( osteoporosis ), which weakens the bones and makes them prone to fracture. Osteoporosis and progressive joint problems in people with mucolipidosis III gamma also cause pain, which becomes more severe over time. People with mucolipidosis III gamma often have heart valve abnormalities and mild clouding of the clear covering of the eye ( cornea ). Their facial features become slightly thickened or "coarse" as they get older. A small percentage of people with this condition have mild intellectual disability or learning problems. Individuals with mucolipidosis III gamma generally survive into adulthood, but they may have a shortened lifespan. Frequency Mucolipidosis III gamma is a rare disorder, although its exact prevalence is unknown. It is estimated to occur in about 1 in 100,000 to 400,000 individuals worldwide. Causes Mutations in the GNPTG gene cause mucolipidosis III gamma. This gene provides instructions for making one part (subunit) of an enzyme called GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase. This enzyme helps prepare certain newly made enzymes for transport to lysosomes. Lysosomes are compartments within the cell that use digestive enzymes to break down large molecules into smaller ones that can be reused by cells. GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase is involved in the process of attaching a molecule called mannose-6-phosphate (M6P) to specific digestive enzymes. Just as luggage is tagged at the airport to direct it to the correct destination, enzymes are often "tagged" after they are made so they get to where they are needed in the cell. M6P acts as a tag that indicates a digestive enzyme should be transported to the lysosome. Mutations in the GNPTG gene that cause mucolipidosis III gamma result in reduced activity of GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase. These mutations disrupt the tagging of digestive enzymes with M6P, which prevents many enzymes from reaching the lysosomes. Digestive enzymes that do not receive the M6P tag end up outside the cell, where they have increased activity. The shortage of digestive enzymes within lysosomes causes large molecules to accumulate there. Conditions that cause molecules to build up inside lysosomes, including mucolipidosis III gamma, are called lysosomal storage disorders. The signs and symptoms of mucolipidosis III gamma are most likely due to the shortage of digestive enzymes inside lysosomes and the effects these enzymes have outside the cell. Learn more about the gene associated with Mucolipidosis III gamma GNPTG Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition ML IIIC Mucolipidosis III Mucolipidosis III, variant Mucolipidosis IIIC Mucolipidosis type III Pseudo-Hurler polydystrophy Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: GNPTG-mucolipidosis Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MUCOLIPIDOSIS III GAMMA Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Cathey SS, Kudo M, Tiede S, Raas-Rothschild A, Braulke T, Beck M, Taylor HA,
Canfield WM, Leroy JG, Neufeld EF, McKusick VA. Molecular order in mucolipidosis
II and III nomenclature. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Feb 15;146A(4):512-3. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.32193. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Encarnacao M, Lacerda L, Costa R, Prata MJ, Coutinho MF, Ribeiro H, Lopes L,
Pineda M, Ignatius J, Galvez H, Mustonen A, Vieira P, Lima MR, Alves S. Molecular
analysis of the GNPTAB and GNPTG genes in 13 patients with mucolipidosis type II
or type III - identification of eight novel mutations. Clin Genet. 2009
Jul;76(1):76-84. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2009.01185.x. Citation on PubMed Liu S, Zhang W, Shi H, Meng Y, Qiu Z. Three novel homozygous mutations in the
GNPTG gene that cause mucolipidosis type III gamma. Gene. 2014 Feb
10;535(2):294-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.11.010. Epub 2013 Dec 6. Citation on PubMed Persichetti E, Chuzhanova NA, Dardis A, Tappino B, Pohl S, Thomas NS, Rosano
C, Balducci C, Paciotti S, Dominissini S, Montalvo AL, Sibilio M, Parini R,
Rigoldi M, Di Rocco M, Parenti G, Orlacchio A, Bembi B, Cooper DN, Filocamo M,
Beccari T. Identification and molecular characterization of six novel mutations
in the UDP-N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphotransferase gamma subunit (GNPTG) gene in
patients with mucolipidosis III gamma. Hum Mutat. 2009 Jun;30(6):978-84. doi:
10.1002/humu.20959. Citation on PubMed Pohl S, Tiede S, Castrichini M, Cantz M, Gieselmann V, Braulke T. Compensatory
expression of human N-acetylglucosaminyl-1-phosphotransferase subunits in
mucolipidosis type III gamma. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Mar;1792(3):221-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2009.01.009. Citation on PubMed Raas-Rothschild A, Bargal R, Goldman O, Ben-Asher E, Groener JE, Toutain A,
Stemmer E, Ben-Neriah Z, Flusser H, Beemer FA, Penttinen M, Olender T, Rein AJ,
Bach G, Zeigler M. Genomic organisation of the
UDP-N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphotransferase gamma subunit (GNPTAG) and its
mutations in mucolipidosis III. J Med Genet. 2004 Apr;41(4):e52. doi:
10.1136/jmg.2003.015222. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Raas-Rothschild A, Cormier-Daire V, Bao M, Genin E, Salomon R, Brewer K,
Zeigler M, Mandel H, Toth S, Roe B, Munnich A, Canfield WM. Molecular basis of
variant pseudo-hurler polydystrophy (mucolipidosis IIIC). J Clin Invest. 2000
Mar;105(5):673-81. doi: 10.1172/JCI5826. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Metabolic Disorders Osteoporosis MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Cloudy cornea Genetics Heart Valves (Image) Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated May 1, 2015