Silver syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Silver syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/silver-syndrome/ Silver syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Silver syndrome belongs to a group of genetic disorders known as hereditary spastic paraplegias. These disorders are characterized by progressive muscle stiffness (spasticity) and, frequently, development of paralysis of the lower limbs (paraplegia). Hereditary spastic paraplegias are divided into two types: pure and complex. Both types involve the lower limbs; the complex types may also involve the upper limbs, although to a lesser degree. In addition, the complex types may affect the brain and parts of the nervous system involved in muscle movement and sensations. Silver syndrome is a complex hereditary spastic paraplegia. The first sign of Silver syndrome is usually weakness in the muscles of the hands. These muscles waste away (amyotrophy), resulting in abnormal positioning of the thumbs and difficulty using the fingers and hands for tasks such as handwriting. People with Silver syndrome often have high-arched feet (pes cavus) and spasticity in the legs. The signs and symptoms of Silver syndrome typically begin in late childhood but can start anytime from early childhood to late adulthood. The muscle problems associated with Silver syndrome slowly worsen with age, but affected individuals can remain active throughout life. Frequency Although Silver syndrome appears to be a rare condition, its exact prevalence is unknown. Causes Mutations in the BSCL2 gene cause Silver syndrome. The BSCL2 gene provides instructions for making a protein called seipin, whose function is unknown. The BSCL2 gene is active (expressed) in cells throughout the body, particularly in nerve cells that control muscle movement ( motor neurons ) and in brain cells. Within cells, seipin is found in the membrane of a cell structure called the endoplasmic reticulum , which is involved in protein processing and transport. BSCL2 gene mutations that cause Silver syndrome likely lead to an alteration in the structure of seipin, causing it to fold into an incorrect 3-dimensional shape. Research findings indicate that misfolded seipin proteins accumulate in the endoplasmic reticulum. This accumulation likely damages and kills motor neurons, which leads to muscle weakness and spasticity. In Silver syndrome, only specific motor neurons are involved, resulting in the hand and leg muscles being solely affected. Some people with Silver syndrome do not have an identified mutation in the BSCL2 gene. The cause of the condition in these individuals is unknown. Learn more about the gene associated with Silver syndrome BSCL2 Inheritance Silver syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In these cases, the affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent . However, some people who inherit the altered gene never develop features of Silver syndrome. (This situation is known as reduced penetrance.) It is unclear why some people with a mutated gene develop the disease and other people with a mutated gene do not. Rarely, Silver syndrome is caused by new mutations in the gene and occurs in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Other Names for This Condition Silver spastic paraplegia syndrome Spastic paraplegia 17 Spastic paraplegia with amyotrophy of hands and feet SPG17 Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary spastic paraplegia 17 Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary spastic paraplegia Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia type 17 Hereditary spastic paraplegia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 17, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT; SPG17 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Cafforio G, Calabrese R, Morelli N, Mancuso M, Piazza S, Martinuzzi A, Bassi
MT, Crippa F, Siciliano G. The first Italian family with evidence of pyramidal
impairment as phenotypic manifestation of Silver syndrome BSCL2 gene mutation.
Neurol Sci. 2008 Jun;29(3):189-91. doi: 10.1007/s10072-008-0937-y. Epub 2008 Jul
9. Citation on PubMed Rowland LP, Bird TD. Silver syndrome: The complexity of complicated hereditary
spastic paraplegia. Neurology. 2008 May 20;70(21):1948-9. doi:
10.1212/01.wnl.0000312519.62351.5b. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Silver JR. Silver syndrome. BMJ. 2007 Sep 1;335(7617):422-3. doi:
10.1136/bmj.39210.408414.AD. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central van de Warrenburg BP, Scheffer H, van Eijk JJ, Versteeg MH, Kremer H, Zwarts
MJ, Schelhaas HJ, van Engelen BG. BSCL2 mutations in two Dutch families with
overlapping Silver syndrome-distal hereditary motor neuropathy. Neuromuscul
Disord. 2006 Feb;16(2):122-5. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2005.11.003. Epub 2006 Jan 19. Citation on PubMed Windpassinger C, Auer-Grumbach M, Irobi J, Patel H, Petek E, Horl G, Malli R,
Reed JA, Dierick I, Verpoorten N, Warner TT, Proukakis C, Van den Bergh P,
Verellen C, Van Maldergem L, Merlini L, De Jonghe P, Timmerman V, Crosby AH,
Wagner K. Heterozygous missense mutations in BSCL2 are associated with distal
hereditary motor neuropathy and Silver syndrome. Nat Genet. 2004 Mar;36(3):271-6.
doi: 10.1038/ng1313. Epub 2004 Feb 22. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Hand Injuries and Disorders Neuromuscular Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2012