Spondylothoracic dysostosis: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Spondylothoracic dysostosis URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/spondylothoracic-dysostosis/ Spondylothoracic dysostosis To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Spondylothoracic dysostosis is a condition characterized by malformation of the bones of the spine and ribs. The bones of the spine (vertebrae) do not develop properly, which causes them to be misshapen and abnormally joined together (fused). The ribs are also fused at the part nearest the spine (posteriorly), which gives the rib cage its characteristic fan-like or "crab" appearance in x-rays.  Affected individuals have short, rigid necks and short torsos because of the bone malformations.  As a result, people with spondylothoracic dysostosis have short bodies but normal-length arms and legs, called short-trunk dwarfism. The spine and rib abnormalities, which are present from birth, cause other signs and symptoms of spondylothoracic dysostosis. Infants with this condition have small chests that cannot expand adequately, often leading to life-threatening breathing problems. As the lungs expand in the narrow chest, the muscle that separates the abdomen from the chest cavity (the diaphragm) is forced down and the abdomen is pushed out. The increased pressure in the abdomen can cause a soft out-pouching around the lower abdomen (inguinal hernia ) or belly-button (umbilical hernia). Breathing problems can be fatal early in life; however, some affected individuals live into adulthood. Spondylothoracic dysostosis is sometimes called spondylocostal dysostosis , a similar condition with abnormalities of the spine and ribs.  The two conditions have been grouped in the past, and both are sometimes referred to as Jarcho-Levin syndrome; however, they are now considered distinct conditions. Frequency Spondylothoracic dysostosis affects about one in 200,000 people worldwide. However, it is much more common in people of Puerto Rican ancestry, affecting approximately one in 12,000 people. Causes The MESP2 gene provides instructions for a protein that plays a critical role in the development of vertebrae. Specifically, it is involved in separating vertebrae and ribs from one another during early development, a process called somite segmentation. Mutations in the MESP2 gene prevent the production of any protein or lead to the production of an abnormally short, nonfunctional protein. When the MESP2 protein is nonfunctional or absent, somite segmentation does not occur properly, which results in malformation and fusion of the bones of the spine and ribs seen in spondylothoracic dysostosis. Learn more about the gene associated with Spondylothoracic dysostosis MESP2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Jarcho-Levin syndrome STD Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Spondylocostal dysostosis Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Autosomal recessive spondylocostal dysostosis Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM SPONDYLOCOSTAL DYSOSTOSIS 1, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE; SCDO1 SPONDYLOCOSTAL DYSOSTOSIS 2, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE; SCDO2 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Berdon WE, Lampl BS, Cornier AS, Ramirez N, Turnpenny PD, Vitale MG, Seimon
LP, Cowles RA. Clinical and radiological distinction between spondylothoracic
dysostosis (Lavy-Moseley syndrome) and spondylocostal dysostosis (Jarcho-Levin
syndrome). Pediatr Radiol. 2011 Mar;41(3):384-8. doi: 10.1007/s00247-010-1928-8.
Epub 2010 Dec 22. Citation on PubMed Cornier AS, Ramirez N, Arroyo S, Acevedo J, Garcia L, Carlo S, Korf B.
Phenotype characterization and natural history of spondylothoracic dysplasia
syndrome: a series of 27 new cases. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Jul 15;128A(2):120-6.
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30011. Citation on PubMed Cornier AS, Staehling-Hampton K, Delventhal KM, Saga Y, Caubet JF, Sasaki N,
Ellard S, Young E, Ramirez N, Carlo SE, Torres J, Emans JB, Turnpenny PD,
Pourquie O. Mutations in the MESP2 gene cause spondylothoracic
dysostosis/Jarcho-Levin syndrome. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Jun;82(6):1334-41. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.04.014. Epub 2008 May 15. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Karnes PS, Day D, Berry SA, Pierpont ME. Jarcho-Levin syndrome: four new cases
and classification of subtypes. Am J Med Genet. 1991 Sep 1;40(3):264-70. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.1320400304. Citation on PubMed Morimoto M, Takahashi Y, Endo M, Saga Y. The Mesp2 transcription factor
establishes segmental borders by suppressing Notch activity. Nature. 2005 May
19;435(7040):354-9. doi: 10.1038/nature03591. Citation on PubMed Sasaki N, Kiso M, Kitagawa M, Saga Y. The repression of Notch signaling occurs
via the destabilization of mastermind-like 1 by Mesp2 and is essential for
somitogenesis. Development. 2011 Jan;138(1):55-64. doi: 10.1242/dev.055533. Epub
2010 Nov 23. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Dwarfism Genetic Disorders Spine Injuries and Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 1, 2016