ALG12-congenital disorder of glycosylation: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → ALG12-congenital disorder of glycosylation URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/alg12-congenital-disorder-of-glycosylation/ ALG12-congenital disorder of glycosylation To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description ALG12 -congenital disorder of glycosylation ( ALG12 -CDG, also known as congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ig) is an inherited disorder with varying signs and symptoms that can affect several body systems. Individuals with ALG12 -CDG typically develop signs and symptoms of the condition during infancy. They may have problems feeding and difficulty growing and gaining weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive). In addition, affected individuals often have intellectual disability, delayed development, and weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and some develop seizures. Some people with ALG12 -CDG have physical abnormalities such as a small head size ( microcephaly ) and unusual facial features. These features can include folds of skin that cover the inner corners of the eyes (epicanthal folds), a prominent nasal bridge, and abnormally shaped ears. Some males with ALG12 -CDG have abnormal genitalia, such as a small penis (micropenis) and undescended testes. People with ALG12 -CDG often produce abnormally low levels of proteins called antibodies (or immunoglobulins), particularly immunoglobulin G (IgG). Antibodies help protect the body against infection by attaching to specific foreign particles and germs, marking them for destruction. A reduction in antibodies can make it difficult for affected individuals to fight infections. Less common abnormalities seen in people with ALG12 -CDG include a weakened heart muscle (cardiomyopathy) and poor bone development, which can lead to skeletal abnormalities. Frequency ALG12 -CDG is a rare condition; its prevalence is unknown. Only a handful of affected individuals have been described in the medical literature. Causes Mutations in the ALG12 gene cause ALG12 -CDG. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme that is involved in a process called glycosylation. During this process, complex chains of sugar molecules (oligosaccharides) are added to proteins and fats (lipids). Glycosylation modifies proteins and lipids so they can fully perform their functions. The enzyme produced from the ALG12 gene transfers a simple sugar called mannose to growing oligosaccharides at a particular step in the formation of the sugar chain. Once the correct number of sugar molecules are linked together, the oligosaccharide is attached to a protein or lipid. ALG12 gene mutations lead to the production of an abnormal enzyme with reduced activity. Without a properly functioning enzyme, mannose cannot be added to the chain efficiently, and the resulting oligosaccharides are often incomplete. Although the short oligosaccharides can be transferred to proteins and fats, the process is not as efficient as with the full-length oligosaccharide. As a result, glycosylation is reduced. The wide variety of signs and symptoms in ALG12 -CDG are likely due to impaired glycosylation of proteins and lipids that are needed for normal function of many organs and tissues, including the brain. Learn more about the gene associated with ALG12-congenital disorder of glycosylation ALG12 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition ALG12-CDG CDG Ig CDG1G Congenital disorder of glycosylation type 1G Congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ig Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: ALG12-congenital disorder of glycosylation Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center ALG12-CDG Congenital disorder of glycosylation Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ig; CDG1G Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Chantret I, Dupre T, Delenda C, Bucher S, Dancourt J, Barnier A, Charollais A,
Heron D, Bader-Meunier B, Danos O, Seta N, Durand G, Oriol R, Codogno P, Moore
SE. Congenital disorders of glycosylation type Ig is defined by a deficiency in
dolichyl-P-mannose:Man7GlcNAc2-PP-dolichyl mannosyltransferase. J Biol Chem. 2002
Jul 12;277(28):25815-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M203285200. Epub 2002 Apr 30. Citation on PubMed Grubenmann CE, Frank CG, Kjaergaard S, Berger EG, Aebi M, Hennet T. ALG12
mannosyltransferase defect in congenital disorder of glycosylation type lg. Hum
Mol Genet. 2002 Sep 15;11(19):2331-9. doi: 10.1093/hmg/11.19.2331. Citation on PubMed Kranz C, Basinger AA, Gucsavas-Calikoglu M, Sun L, Powell CM, Henderson FW,
Aylsworth AS, Freeze HH. Expanding spectrum of congenital disorder of
glycosylation Ig (CDG-Ig): sibs with a unique skeletal dysplasia,
hypogammaglobulinemia, cardiomyopathy, genital malformations, and early
lethality. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Jun 15;143A(12):1371-8. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.31791. Citation on PubMed Murali C, Lu JT, Jain M, Liu DS, Lachman R, Gibbs RA, Lee BH, Cohn D, Campeau
PM. Diagnosis of ALG12-CDG by exome sequencing in a case of severe skeletal
dysplasia. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2014;1:213-219. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2014.04.004. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Thiel C, Schwarz M, Hasilik M, Grieben U, Hanefeld F, Lehle L, von Figura K,
Korner C. Deficiency of dolichyl-P-Man:Man7GlcNAc2-PP-dolichyl
mannosyltransferase causes congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ig. Biochem
J. 2002 Oct 1;367(Pt 1):195-201. doi: 10.1042/BJ20020794. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Metabolic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2019