Neutral lipid storage disease with myopathy: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Neutral lipid storage disease with myopathy URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/neutral-lipid-storage-disease-with-myopathy/ Neutral lipid storage disease with myopathy To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Neutral lipid storage disease with myopathy is a condition in which fats (lipids) are stored abnormally in organs and tissues throughout the body.  People with this condition have muscle weakness (myopathy) due to the accumulation of fats in muscle tissue. Other features of this condition may include a fatty liver, a weakened and enlarged heart (cardiomyopathy), inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis), reduced thyroid activity (hypothyroidism), and type 2 diabetes (the most common form of diabetes). Signs and symptoms of neutral lipid storage disease with myopathy vary greatly among affected individuals. Frequency Neutral lipid storage disease with myopathy is a rare condition; its incidence is unknown. Causes Mutations in the PNPLA2 gene cause neutral lipid storage disease with myopathy. The PNPLA2 gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL). The ATGL enzyme plays a role in breaking down fats called triglycerides.  Triglycerides are an important source of stored energy in cells. These fats must be broken down into simpler molecules called fatty acids before they can be used for energy. PNPLA2 gene mutations impair the ATGL enzyme's ability to break down triglycerides. These triglycerides then accumulate in muscle and tissues throughout the body, resulting in the signs and symptoms of neutral lipid storage disease with myopathy. Learn more about the gene associated with Neutral lipid storage disease with myopathy PNPLA2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Neutral lipid storage disease without ichthyosis NLSDM Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Neutral lipid storage myopathy Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Neutral lipid storage myopathy Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM NEUTRAL LIPID STORAGE DISEASE WITH MYOPATHY; NLSDM Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bruno C, Dimauro S. Lipid storage myopathies. Curr Opin Neurol. 2008
Oct;21(5):601-6. doi: 10.1097/WCO.0b013e32830dd5a6. Citation on PubMed Fischer J, Lefevre C, Morava E, Mussini JM, Laforet P, Negre-Salvayre A,
Lathrop M, Salvayre R. The gene encoding adipose triglyceride lipase (PNPLA2) is
mutated in neutral lipid storage disease with myopathy. Nat Genet. 2007
Jan;39(1):28-30. doi: 10.1038/ng1951. Epub 2006 Dec 24. Citation on PubMed Kobayashi K, Inoguchi T, Maeda Y, Nakashima N, Kuwano A, Eto E, Ueno N, Sasaki
S, Sawada F, Fujii M, Matoba Y, Sumiyoshi S, Kawate H, Takayanagi R. The lack of
the C-terminal domain of adipose triglyceride lipase causes neutral lipid storage
disease through impaired interactions with lipid droplets. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2008 Jul;93(7):2877-84. doi: 10.1210/jc.2007-2247. Epub 2008 Apr 29. Citation on PubMed Natali A, Gastaldelli A, Camastra S, Baldi S, Quagliarini F, Minicocci I,
Bruno C, Pennisi E, Arca M. Metabolic consequences of adipose triglyceride lipase
deficiency in humans: an in vivo study in patients with neutral lipid storage
disease with myopathy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Sep;98(9):E1540-8. doi:
10.1210/jc.2013-1444. Epub 2013 Jul 3. Citation on PubMed Reilich P, Horvath R, Krause S, Schramm N, Turnbull DM, Trenell M,
Hollingsworth KG, Gorman GS, Hans VH, Reimann J, MacMillan A, Turner L, Schollen
A, Witte G, Czermin B, Holinski-Feder E, Walter MC, Schoser B, Lochmuller H. The
phenotypic spectrum of neutral lipid storage myopathy due to mutations in the
PNPLA2 gene. J Neurol. 2011 Nov;258(11):1987-97. doi: 10.1007/s00415-011-6055-4.
Epub 2011 May 5. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Cardiomyopathy Genetic Disorders Lipid Metabolism Disorders Muscle Disorders Pancreatitis MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Hypothyroidism Type 2 Diabetes Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2014