Alpers-Huttenlocher syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Alpers-Huttenlocher syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/alpers-huttenlocher-syndrome/ Alpers-Huttenlocher syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Alpers-Huttenlocher syndrome is one of the most severe of a group of conditions called the POLG -related disorders. The conditions in this group feature a range of similar signs and symptoms involving muscle-, nerve-, and brain-related functions. Alpers-Huttenlocher syndrome typically becomes apparent in children between ages 2 and 4. People with this condition usually have three characteristic features: recurrent seizures that do not improve with treatment (intractable epilepsy), loss of mental and movement abilities (psychomotor regression), and liver disease. People with Alpers-Huttenlocher syndrome usually have additional signs and symptoms. Most have problems with coordination and balance (ataxia) and disturbances in nerve function (neuropathy). Neuropathy can lead to abnormal or absent reflexes (areflexia). In addition, affected individuals may develop weak muscle tone (hypotonia) that worsens until they lose the ability to control their muscles and movement. Some people with Alpers-Huttenlocher syndrome lose the ability to walk, sit, or feed themselves. Other movement-related symptoms in affected individuals can include involuntary muscle twitches (myoclonus), uncontrollable movements of the limbs (choreoathetosis), or a pattern of movement abnormalities known as parkinsonism. Affected individuals may have other brain-related signs and symptoms. Migraine headaches, often with visual sensations or auras, are common. Additionally, people with this condition may have decreased brain function that is demonstrated as sleepiness, inability to concentrate, irritability, or loss of language skills or memory. Some people with the condition may lose their eyesight or hearing. People with Alpers-Huttenlocher syndrome can survive from a few months to more than 10 years after the condition first appears. Frequency The prevalence of Alpers-Huttenlocher syndrome is approximately 1 in 100,000 individuals. Causes Alpers-Huttenlocher syndrome is caused by mutations in the POLG gene. This gene provides instructions for making one part, the alpha subunit, of a protein called polymerase gamma (pol γ). Pol γ functions in mitochondria, which are structures within cells that use oxygen to convert the energy from food into a form cells can use. Mitochondria each contain a small amount of DNA, known as mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), which is essential for the normal function of these structures. Pol γ "reads" sequences of mtDNA and uses them as templates to produce new copies of mtDNA in a process called DNA replication . Most POLG gene mutations change single protein building blocks ( amino acids ) in the alpha subunit of pol γ. These changes result in a mutated pol γ that has a reduced ability to replicate DNA. Although the mechanism is unknown, mutations in the POLG gene often result in a reduced number of copies of mtDNA (mtDNA depletion), particularly in muscle, brain, and liver cells. MtDNA depletion causes a decrease in cellular energy, which could account for the signs and symptoms of Alpers-Huttenlocher syndrome. A mutation in the POLG gene has not been identified in approximately 13 percent of people diagnosed with Alpers-Huttenlocher syndrome. Researchers are working to identify other genes that may be responsible for the condition. Learn more about the gene associated with Alpers-Huttenlocher syndrome POLG Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Alpers diffuse degeneration of cerebral gray matter with hepatic cirrhosis Alpers disease Alpers progressive infantile poliodystrophy Alpers syndrome Diffuse cerebral sclerosis of Schilder Progressive sclerosing poliodystrophy Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Progressive sclerosing poliodystrophy Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Alpers-Huttenlocher syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MITOCHONDRIAL DNA DEPLETION SYNDROME 4A (ALPERS TYPE); MTDPS4A Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Chan SS, Longley MJ, Copeland WC. The common A467T mutation in the human
mitochondrial DNA polymerase (POLG) compromises catalytic efficiency and
interaction with the accessory subunit. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 9;280(36):31341-6.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M506762200. Epub 2005 Jul 16. Citation on PubMed Cohen BH, Chinnery PF, Copeland WC. POLG-Related Disorders. 2010 Mar
16 [updated 2024 Feb 29]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace
SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA):
University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK26471/ Citation on PubMed Milone M, Massie R. Polymerase gamma 1 mutations: clinical correlations.
Neurologist. 2010 Mar;16(2):84-91. doi: 10.1097/NRL.0b013e3181c78a89. Citation on PubMed Moraes CT, Shanske S, Tritschler HJ, Aprille JR, Andreetta F, Bonilla E, Schon
EA, DiMauro S. mtDNA depletion with variable tissue expression: a novel genetic
abnormality in mitochondrial diseases. Am J Hum Genet. 1991 Mar;48(3):492-501. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Nguyen KV, Sharief FS, Chan SS, Copeland WC, Naviaux RK. Molecular diagnosis
of Alpers syndrome. J Hepatol. 2006 Jul;45(1):108-16. doi:
10.1016/j.jhep.2005.12.026. Epub 2006 Feb 20. Citation on PubMed Rocher C, Taanman JW, Pierron D, Faustin B, Benard G, Rossignol R, Malgat M,
Pedespan L, Letellier T. Influence of mitochondrial DNA level on cellular energy
metabolism: implications for mitochondrial diseases. J Bioenerg Biomembr. 2008
Apr;40(2):59-67. doi: 10.1007/s10863-008-9130-5. Epub 2008 Apr 16. Citation on PubMed Stumpf JD, Copeland WC. Mitochondrial DNA replication and disease: insights
from DNA polymerase gamma mutations. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2011 Jan;68(2):219-33. doi:
10.1007/s00018-010-0530-4. Epub 2010 Oct 8. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Balance Problems Degenerative Nerve Diseases Genetic Brain Disorders Genetic Disorders Liver Diseases Movement Disorders Seizures MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 1, 2011