Deafness and myopia syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Deafness and myopia syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/deafness-and-myopia-syndrome/ Deafness and myopia syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Deafness and myopia syndrome is a disorder that causes problems with both hearing and vision. People with this disorder have moderate to profound hearing loss in both ears that may worsen over time. The hearing loss may be described as sensorineural, meaning that it is related to changes in the inner ear , or it may be caused by auditory neuropathy, which is a problem with the transmission of sound (auditory) signals from the inner ear to the brain. The hearing loss is either present at birth (congenital) or begins in infancy, before the child learns to speak (prelingual). Affected individuals also have severe nearsightedness (high myopia ). These individuals are able to see nearby objects clearly, but objects that are farther away appear blurry. The myopia is usually diagnosed by early childhood. Frequency The prevalence of deafness and myopia syndrome is unknown. Only a few affected families have been described in the medical literature. Causes Deafness and myopia syndrome is caused by mutations in the SLITRK6 gene. The protein produced from this gene is found primarily in the inner ear and the eye. This protein promotes growth and survival of nerve cells (neurons) in the inner ear that transmit auditory signals. It also controls (regulates) the growth of the eye after birth. In particular, the SLITRK6 protein influences the length of the eyeball (axial length), which affects whether a person will be nearsighted or farsighted, or will have normal vision. The SLITRK6 protein spans the cell membrane, where it is anchored in the proper position to perform its function. SLITRK6 gene mutations that cause deafness and myopia syndrome result in an abnormally short SLITRK6 protein that is not anchored properly to the cell membrane. As a result, the protein is unable to function normally. Impaired SLITRK6 protein function leads to abnormal nerve development in the inner ear and improperly controlled eyeball growth, resulting in the hearing loss and nearsightedness that occur in deafness and myopia syndrome. Learn more about the gene associated with Deafness and myopia syndrome SLITRK6 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Deafness and myopia Deafness, cochlear, plus DFNMYP High myopia and sensorineural deafness High myopia-sensorineural deafness syndrome Myopia and deafness Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: High myopia-sensorineural deafness syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center High myopia-sensorineural deafness syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM DEAFNESS AND MYOPIA; DFNMYP Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Aruga J, Yokota N, Mikoshiba K. Human SLITRK family genes: genomic
organization and expression profiling in normal brain and brain tumor tissue.
Gene. 2003 Oct 2;315:87-94. doi: 10.1016/s0378-1119(03)00715-7. Citation on PubMed Morlet T, Rabinowitz MR, Looney LR, Riegner T, Greenwood LA, Sherman EA,
Achilly N, Zhu A, Yoo E, O'Reilly RC, Jinks RN, Puffenberger EG, Heaps A, Morton
H, Strauss KA. A homozygous SLITRK6 nonsense mutation is associated with
progressive auditory neuropathy in humans. Laryngoscope. 2014 Mar;124(3):E95-103.
doi: 10.1002/lary.24361. Epub 2013 Dec 17. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Tekin M, Chioza BA, Matsumoto Y, Diaz-Horta O, Cross HE, Duman D, Kokotas H,
Moore-Barton HL, Sakoori K, Ota M, Odaka YS, Foster J 2nd, Cengiz FB,
Tokgoz-Yilmaz S, Tekeli O, Grigoriadou M, Petersen MB, Sreekantan-Nair A, Gurtz
K, Xia XJ, Pandya A, Patton MA, Young JI, Aruga J, Crosby AH. SLITRK6 mutations
cause myopia and deafness in humans and mice. J Clin Invest. 2013
May;123(5):2094-102. doi: 10.1172/JCI65853. Epub 2013 Apr 1. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Cochlear Implants Genetic Disorders Hearing Aids Hearing Problems in Children Newborn Screening Refractive Errors MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Cochlear implant Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated November 1, 2015