Bartter syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Bartter syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/bartter-syndrome/ Bartter syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Bartter syndrome is a group of very similar kidney disorders that cause an imbalance of potassium, sodium, chloride, and related molecules in the body. In some cases, Bartter syndrome becomes apparent before birth. The disorder can cause polyhydramnios, which is an increased volume of fluid surrounding the fetus (amniotic fluid). Polyhydramnios increases the risk of premature birth. Beginning in infancy, affected individuals often fail to grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive). They lose excess amounts of salt (sodium chloride) in their urine, which leads to dehydration, constipation, and increased urine production (polyuria). In addition, large amounts of calcium are lost through the urine (hypercalciuria), which can cause weakening of the bones (osteopenia). Some of the calcium is deposited in the kidneys as they are concentrating urine, leading to hardening of the kidney tissue (nephrocalcinosis). Bartter syndrome is also characterized by low levels of potassium in the blood (hypokalemia), which can result in muscle weakness, cramping, and fatigue. Rarely, affected children develop hearing loss caused by abnormalities in the inner ear (sensorineural deafness). Two major forms of Bartter syndrome are distinguished by their age of onset and severity. One form begins before birth (antenatal) and is often life-threatening. The other form, often called the classical form, begins in early childhood and tends to be less severe. Once the genetic causes of Bartter syndrome were identified, researchers also split the disorder into different types based on the genes involved. Types I, II, and IV have the features of antenatal Bartter syndrome. Because type IV is also associated with hearing loss, it is sometimes called antenatal Bartter syndrome with sensorineural deafness. Type III usually has the features of classical Bartter syndrome. Frequency The exact prevalence of this disorder is unknown, although it likely affects about 1 per million people worldwide. The condition appears to be more common in Costa Rica and Kuwait than in other populations. Causes Bartter syndrome can be caused by mutations in at least five genes. Mutations in the SLC12A1 gene cause type I. Type II results from mutations in the KCNJ1 gene. Mutations in the CLCNKB gene are responsible for type III. Type IV can result from mutations in the BSND gene or from a combination of mutations in the CLCNKA and CLCNKB genes. The genes associated with Bartter syndrome play important roles in normal kidney function . The proteins produced from these genes are involved in the kidneys' reabsorption of salt. Mutations in any of the five genes impair the kidneys' ability to reabsorb salt, leading to the loss of excess salt in the urine (salt wasting). Abnormalities of salt transport also affect the reabsorption of other charged atoms (ions), including potassium and calcium. The resulting imbalance of ions in the body leads to the major features of Bartter syndrome. In some people with Bartter syndrome, the genetic cause of the disorder is unknown. Researchers are searching for additional genes that may be associated with this condition. Learn more about the genes associated with Bartter syndrome BSND CLCNKA CLCNKB KCNJ1 SLC12A1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Aldosteronism with hyperplasia of the adrenal cortex Bartter disease Bartter's syndrome Juxtaglomerular hyperplasia with secondary aldosteronism Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Antenatal Bartter Syndrome Genetic Testing Registry: Bartter disease type 4a Genetic Testing Registry: Bartter syndrome Genetic Testing Registry: Bartter disease type 3 Genetic Testing Registry: Bartter disease type 4B Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Bartter syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM BARTTER SYNDROME, TYPE 1, ANTENATAL; BARTS1 BARTTER SYNDROME, TYPE 2, ANTENATAL; BARTS2 BARTTER SYNDROME, TYPE 4A, NEONATAL, WITH SENSORINEURAL DEAFNESS; BARTS4A BARTTER SYNDROME, TYPE 3; BARTS3 BARTTER SYNDROME, TYPE 4B, NEONATAL, WITH SENSORINEURAL DEAFNESS; BARTS4B Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Hebert SC. Bartter syndrome. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2003
Sep;12(5):527-32. doi: 10.1097/00041552-200309000-00008. Citation on PubMed Kleta R, Bockenhauer D. Bartter syndromes and other salt-losing tubulopathies.
Nephron Physiol. 2006;104(2):p73-80. doi: 10.1159/000094001. Epub 2006 Jun 19. Citation on PubMed Proesmans W. Threading through the mizmaze of Bartter syndrome. Pediatr
Nephrol. 2006 Jul;21(7):896-902. doi: 10.1007/s00467-006-0113-7. Epub 2006 May
16. Citation on PubMed Seyberth HW. An improved terminology and classification of Bartter-like
syndromes. Nat Clin Pract Nephrol. 2008 Oct;4(10):560-7. doi:
10.1038/ncpneph0912. Epub 2008 Aug 12. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Kidney Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Bartter syndrome Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2011