Frasier syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Frasier syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/frasier-syndrome/ Frasier syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Frasier syndrome is a condition that affects the kidneys and genitalia. Frasier syndrome is characterized by kidney disease that begins in early childhood. Affected individuals have a condition called focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, in which scar tissue forms in some glomeruli, which are the tiny blood vessels in the kidneys that filter waste from blood . In people with Frasier syndrome, this condition often leads to kidney failure by adolescence. Although males with Frasier syndrome have the typical male chromosome pattern ( 46,XY ), they have gonadal dysgenesis, in which external genitalia do not look clearly male or clearly female  or the genitalia appear  female-typical. The internal reproductive organs (gonads) are typically undeveloped and referred to as streak gonads. These abnormal gonads are nonfunctional and often become cancerous, so they are usually removed surgically early in life. Affected females usually have normal genitalia and gonads and have only the kidney features of the condition. Because they do not have all the features of the condition, females are usually given the diagnosis of isolated nephrotic syndrome. Frequency Frasier syndrome is thought to be a rare condition; approximately 50 cases have been described in the scientific literature. Causes Mutations in the WT1 gene cause Frasier syndrome. The WT1 gene provides instructions for making a protein that regulates the activity of other genes by attaching (binding) to specific regions of DNA . On the basis of this action, the WT1 protein is called a transcription factor. The WT1 protein plays a role in the development of the kidneys and gonads (ovaries in females and testes in males) before birth. The WT1 gene mutations that cause Frasier syndrome lead to the production of a protein with an impaired ability to control gene activity and regulate the development of the kidneys and reproductive organs, resulting in the signs and symptoms of Frasier syndrome. Frasier syndrome has features similar to another condition called Denys-Drash syndrome , which is also caused by mutations in the WT1 gene. Because these two conditions share a genetic cause and have overlapping features, some researchers have suggested that they are part of a spectrum and not two distinct conditions. Learn more about the gene associated with Frasier syndrome WT1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition FS Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Frasier syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Frasier syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM FRASIER SYNDROME Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Andrade JG, Guaragna MS, Soardi FC, Guerra-Junior G, Mello MP, Maciel-Guerra
AT. Clinical and genetic findings of five patients with WT1-related disorders.
Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2008 Nov;52(8):1236-43. doi:
10.1590/s0004-27302008000800006. Citation on PubMed Fujita S, Sugimoto K, Miyazawa T, Yanagida H, Tabata N, Okada M, Takemura T. A
female infant with Frasier syndrome showing splice site mutation in Wilms' tumor
gene (WT1) intron 9. Clin Nephrol. 2010 Jun;73(6):487-91. doi: 10.5414/cnp73487. Citation on PubMed Niaudet P, Gubler MC. WT1 and glomerular diseases. Pediatr Nephrol. 2006
Nov;21(11):1653-60. doi: 10.1007/s00467-006-0208-1. Epub 2006 Aug 23. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Kidney Diseases Kidney Failure MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Ambiguous genitalia Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis Genetics Nephrotic syndrome Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 1, 2013