Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/dihydropyrimidine-dehydrogenase-deficiency/ Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency is a disorder characterized by a wide range of severity, with neurological problems in some individuals and no signs or symptoms in others. In people with severe dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency, the disorder becomes apparent in infancy. These affected individuals have neurological problems such as recurrent seizures (epilepsy), intellectual disability, a small head size ( microcephaly ), increased muscle tone (hypertonia), delayed development of motor skills such as walking, and autistic behaviors that affect communication and social interaction. Other affected individuals are asymptomatic, which means they do not have any signs or symptoms of the condition. Individuals with asymptomatic dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency may be identified only by laboratory testing. People with dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency, including those who otherwise exhibit no symptoms, are vulnerable to severe, potentially life-threatening toxic reactions to certain drugs called fluoropyrimidines that are used to treat cancer. Common examples of these drugs are 5-fluorouracil and capecitabine. These drugs are not broken down efficiently by people with dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency and build up to toxic levels in the body (fluoropyrimidine toxicity). Severe inflammation and ulceration of the lining of the gastrointestinal tract (mucositis) may occur, which can lead to signs and symptoms including mouth sores, abdominal pain, bleeding, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Fluoropyrimidine toxicity may also lead to low numbers of white blood cells (neutropenia), which increases the risk of infections. It can also be associated with low numbers of platelets in the blood (thrombocytopenia), which impairs blood clotting and may lead to abnormal bleeding (hemorrhage). Redness, swelling, numbness, and peeling of the skin on the palms and soles (hand-foot syndrome); shortness of breath; and hair loss may also occur. Frequency Severe dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency, with its early-onset neurological symptoms, is a rare disorder. Its prevalence is unknown. However, between 2 and 8 percent of the general population may be vulnerable to toxic reactions to fluoropyrimidine drugs caused by otherwise asymptomatic dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency. Causes Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency is caused by mutations in the DPYD gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, which is involved in the breakdown of molecules called uracil and thymine. Uracil and thymine are pyrimidines, which are one type of nucleotide . Nucleotides are building blocks of DNA, its chemical cousin RNA, and molecules such as ATP and GTP that serve as energy sources in the cell. Mutations in the DPYD gene result in a lack (deficiency) of functional dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase. Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency interferes with the breakdown of uracil and thymine, and results in excess quantities of these molecules in the blood, urine, and the fluid that surrounds the brain and spinal cord ( cerebrospinal fluid ). It is unclear how the excess uracil and thymine are related to the specific signs and symptoms of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency. Mutations that result in the absence (complete deficiency) of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase generally lead to more severe signs and symptoms than do mutations that lead to a partial deficiency of this enzyme. Because fluoropyrimidine drugs are also broken down by the dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase enzyme, deficiency of this enzyme leads to the drug buildup that causes fluoropyrimidine toxicity. Learn more about the gene associated with Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency DPYD Inheritance Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. Depending on the severity of these mutations, people with two mutated copies of the DPYD gene in each cell may exhibit the signs and symptoms of this disorder, or they may be generally asymptomatic but at risk for toxic reactions to fluoropyrimidine drugs. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. However, people with one mutated copy of the DPYD gene in each cell may still experience toxic reactions to fluoropyrimidine drugs. Other Names for This Condition Dihydropyrimidinuria DPD deficiency Familial pyrimidemia Hereditary thymine-uraciluria Additional Information & Resources Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM DIHYDROPYRIMIDINE DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY; DPYDD Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Al-Sanna'a NA, Van Kuilenburg AB, Atrak TM, Abdul-Jabbar MA, Van Gennip AH.
Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency presenting at birth. J Inherit Metab
Dis. 2005;28(5):793-6. doi: 10.1007/s10545-005-4218-0. Citation on PubMed Caudle KE, Thorn CF, Klein TE, Swen JJ, McLeod HL, Diasio RB, Schwab M.
Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium guidelines for
dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase genotype and fluoropyrimidine dosing. Clin
Pharmacol Ther. 2013 Dec;94(6):640-5. doi: 10.1038/clpt.2013.172. Epub 2013 Aug
29. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Ciccolini J, Gross E, Dahan L, Lacarelle B, Mercier C. Routine
dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase testing for anticipating 5-fluorouracil-related
severe toxicities: hype or hope? Clin Colorectal Cancer. 2010 Oct;9(4):224-8.
doi: 10.3816/CCC.2010.n.033. Citation on PubMed Mattison LK, Fourie J, Desmond RA, Modak A, Saif MW, Diasio RB. Increased
prevalence of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency in African-Americans
compared with Caucasians. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Sep 15;12(18):5491-5. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-06-0747. Citation on PubMed Saif MW, Mattison L, Carollo T, Ezzeldin H, Diasio RB. Dihydropyrimidine
dehydrogenase deficiency in an Indian population. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol.
2006 Sep;58(3):396-401. doi: 10.1007/s00280-005-0174-5. Epub 2006 Jan 19. Citation on PubMed van Kuilenburg AB, De Abreu RA, van Gennip AH. Pharmacogenetic and clinical
aspects of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency. Ann Clin Biochem. 2003
Jan;40(Pt 1):41-5. doi: 10.1258/000456303321016150. Citation on PubMed van Kuilenburg AB, Dobritzsch D, Meinsma R, Haasjes J, Waterham HR, Nowaczyk
MJ, Maropoulos GD, Hein G, Kalhoff H, Kirk JM, Baaske H, Aukett A, Duley JA, Ward
KP, Lindqvist Y, van Gennip AH. Novel disease-causing mutations in the
dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase gene interpreted by analysis of the
three-dimensional protein structure. Biochem J. 2002 May 15;364(Pt 1):157-63.
doi: 10.1042/bj3640157. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central van Kuilenburg AB, Meijer J, Mul AN, Hennekam RC, Hoovers JM, de Die-Smulders
CE, Weber P, Mori AC, Bierau J, Fowler B, Macke K, Sass JO, Meinsma R, Hennermann
JB, Miny P, Zoetekouw L, Vijzelaar R, Nicolai J, Ylstra B, Rubio-Gozalbo ME.
Analysis of severely affected patients with dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase
deficiency reveals large intragenic rearrangements of DPYD and a de novo
interstitial deletion del(1)(p13.3p21.3). Hum Genet. 2009 Jun;125(5-6):581-90.
doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0653-6. Epub 2009 Mar 19. Citation on PubMed Van Kuilenburg AB, Vreken P, Abeling NG, Bakker HD, Meinsma R, Van Lenthe H,
De Abreu RA, Smeitink JA, Kayserili H, Apak MY, Christensen E, Holopainen I,
Pulkki K, Riva D, Botteon G, Holme E, Tulinius M, Kleijer WJ, Beemer FA, Duran M,
Niezen-Koning KE, Smit GP, Jakobs C, Smit LM, Van Gennip AH, et al. Genotype and
phenotype in patients with dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency. Hum Genet.
1999 Jan;104(1):1-9. doi: 10.1007/pl00008711. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Brain Disorders Genetic Disorders Metabolic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated September 1, 2015