Isolated Duane retraction syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Isolated Duane retraction syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/isolated-duane-retraction-syndrome/ Isolated Duane retraction syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Isolated Duane retraction syndrome is a disorder of eye movement. This condition prevents outward movement of the eye (toward the ear), and in some cases it may also limit inward eye movement (toward the nose). In people with this condition, the eyeball pulls back (retracts) into its socket and the eyelid opening narrows as the eye moves inward. Due to these movement limitations, the eyes often do not look in the same direction (strabismus). Instead, affected individuals may need to turn their head to track objects with both eyes. Normally, only one eye is affected (most commonly the left eye) in people with isolated Duane retraction syndrome. About 10 percent of people with this condition also develop amblyopia ("lazy eye"), a condition that causes vision loss in the affected eye. About 70 percent of all cases of Duane retraction syndrome are isolated, which means they occur without other signs and symptoms. The remaining cases of Duane retraction syndrome occur as part of syndromes that affect other areas of the body. For example, Duane-radial ray syndrome is characterized by this eye disorder and abnormalities of bones in the arms and hands. Researchers have identified three forms of isolated Duane retraction syndrome, designated types I, II, and III. The types are differentiated by which eye movements are most severely restricted (inward, outward, or both). All three types are characterized by a retraction of the eyeball as the eye moves inward. Frequency Isolated Duane retraction syndrome is estimated to affect 1 in 1,000 to 10,000 people worldwide.  This condition accounts for 1 percent to 5 percent of all cases of strabismus. Causes In most people with isolated Duane retraction syndrome, the cause of the condition is unknown. However, researchers have identified variants (also called mutations) in the CHN1 gene that cause the disorder in some affected individuals. The CHN1 gene provides instructions for making a protein called N-chimaerin. This protein is involved in the early development of the nervous system. Specifically, the protein appears to be critical for the formation of nerves that send movement signals to several of the muscles surrounding the eyes (extraocular muscles). Variants in the CHN1 gene disrupt the normal development of these nerves so they cannot effectively control the extraocular muscles. Impaired function of these muscles leads to restricted eye movement and related problems with vision. Variants in other genes can cause isolated Duane retraction syndrome in a small number of people. Learn more about the gene associated with Isolated Duane retraction syndrome CHN1 Additional Information from NCBI Gene: MAFB Inheritance Isolated Duane retraction syndrome usually occurs in people with no history of the disorder in their family. These cases are described as simplex, and their genetic cause is unknown. Less commonly, isolated Duane retraction syndrome can run in families. Familial cases most often have an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. When isolated Duane retraction syndrome is caused by CHN1 gene variants, it has an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. Other Names for This Condition Co-contractive retraction syndrome Duane anomaly, isolated Duane retraction syndrome Duane syndrome Duane's syndrome Ocular retraction syndrome Stilling-Turk-Duane syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Duane retraction syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Duane retraction syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM DUANE RETRACTION SYNDROME 1; DURS1 DUANE RETRACTION SYNDROME 2; DURS2 DUANE RETRACTION SYNDROME 3 WITH OR WITHOUT DEAFNESS; DURS3 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Appukuttan B, Gillanders E, Juo SH, Freas-Lutz D, Ott S, Sood R, Van Auken A,
Bailey-Wilson J, Wang X, Patel RJ, Robbins CM, Chung M, Annett G, Weinberg K,
Borchert MS, Trent JM, Brownstein MJ, Stout JT. Localization of a gene for Duane
retraction syndrome to chromosome 2q31. Am J Hum Genet. 1999 Dec;65(6):1639-46.
doi: 10.1086/302656. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Barry BJ, Whitman MC, Hunter DG, Engle EC. Duane Syndrome. 2007 May 25
[updated 2019 Aug 29]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE,
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University
of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1190/ Citation on PubMed Demer JL, Clark RA, Lim KH, Engle EC. Magnetic resonance imaging evidence for
widespread orbital dysinnervation in dominant Duane's retraction syndrome linked
to the DURS2 locus. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2007 Jan;48(1):194-202. doi:
10.1167/iovs.06-0632. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Engle EC, Andrews C, Law K, Demer JL. Two pedigrees segregating Duane's
retraction syndrome as a dominant trait map to the DURS2 genetic locus. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2007 Jan;48(1):189-93. doi: 10.1167/iovs.06-0631. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Miyake N, Chilton J, Psatha M, Cheng L, Andrews C, Chan WM, Law K, Crosier M,
Lindsay S, Cheung M, Allen J, Gutowski NJ, Ellard S, Young E, Iannaccone A,
Appukuttan B, Stout JT, Christiansen S, Ciccarelli ML, Baldi A, Campioni M,
Zenteno JC, Davenport D, Mariani LE, Sahin M, Guthrie S, Engle EC. Human CHN1
mutations hyperactivate alpha2-chimaerin and cause Duane's retraction syndrome.
Science. 2008 Aug 8;321(5890):839-43. doi: 10.1126/science.1156121. Epub 2008 Jul
24. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Mohan K, Sharma A, Pandav SS. Differences in epidemiological and clinical
characteristics between various types of Duane retraction syndrome in 331
patients. J AAPOS. 2008 Dec;12(6):576-80. doi: 10.1016/j.jaapos.2008.04.015. Epub
2008 Aug 23. Citation on PubMed Prasad P, Saxena A, Saxena R. Duane syndrome: An overview on the current
management. Taiwan J Ophthalmol. 2023 Dec 20;13(4):489-499. doi:
10.4103/tjo.TJO-D-23-00078. eCollection 2023 Oct-Dec. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Eye Movement Disorders Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Extraocular muscle function testing Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated May 31, 2024