Glycogen storage disease type VII: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Glycogen storage disease type VII URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/glycogen-storage-disease-type-vii/ Glycogen storage disease type VII To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Glycogen storage disease type VII (GSDVII) is an inherited disorder caused by an inability to break down a complex sugar called glycogen in muscle cells. A lack of glycogen breakdown interferes with the function of muscle cells. There are four types of GSDVII. They are differentiated by their signs and symptoms and the age at which symptoms first appear. The classical form of GSDVII is the most common form. Its features usually appear in childhood. This form is characterized by muscle pain and cramps, often following moderate exercise; strenuous exercise can lead to nausea and vomiting. During exercise, muscle tissue can be abnormally broken down, releasing a protein called myoglobin. This protein is processed by the kidneys and released in the urine (myoglobinuria). If untreated, myoglobinuria can damage the kidneys and lead to kidney failure. Some people with the classical form of GSDVII develop high levels of a waste product called uric acid in the blood (hyperuricemia) because the damaged kidneys are unable to remove uric acid effectively. Affected individuals may also have elevated levels of a molecule called bilirubin in the blood that can cause yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice). Individuals with classical GSDVII often have elevated levels of an enzyme called creatine kinase in their blood. This finding is a common indicator of muscle disease. Infants with the severe infantile form of GSDVII have low muscle tone (hypotonia) at birth, which leads to muscle weakness (myopathy) that worsens over time. Affected infants have a weakened and enlarged heart ( cardiomyopathy ) and difficulty breathing normally. Individuals with this form of GSDVII usually do not survive past their first year of life. In the late-onset form of GSDVII, myopathy is typically the only feature. The muscle weakness appears in adulthood, although some individuals have difficulty with sustained exercise starting in childhood. The weakness generally affects the muscles closest to the center of the body (proximal muscles). The hemolytic form of GSDVII is characterized by hemolytic anemia, in which red blood cells are broken down (undergo hemolysis) prematurely, causing a shortage of red blood cells ( anemia ). People with the hemolytic form of GSDVII do not experience any signs or symptoms of muscle pain or weakness related to the disorder. Frequency GSDVII is thought to be a rare condition; more than 100 cases have been described in the scientific literature. Causes Mutations in the PFKM gene cause GSDVII. This gene provides instructions for making one piece (the PFKM subunit) of an enzyme called phosphofructokinase, which plays a role in the breakdown of glycogen . The phosphofructokinase enzyme is made up of four subunits and is found in a variety of tissues. Different combinations of subunits are found in different tissues. In muscles used for movement ( skeletal muscles ), the phosphofructokinase enzyme is composed solely of PFKM subunits. In skeletal muscle, the cells' main source of energy is stored as glycogen. Glycogen can be broken down rapidly into the simple sugar glucose when energy is needed, for instance to maintain normal blood glucose levels between meals or for energy during exercise. Phosphofructokinase is involved in the sequence of events that breaks down glycogen to provide energy to muscle cells. PFKM gene mutations result in the production of PFKM subunits that have little or no function. As a result, no functional phosphofructokinase is formed in skeletal muscles, and glycogen cannot be completely broken down. Partially broken down glycogen then builds up in muscle cells. Muscles that do not have access to glycogen as an energy source become weakened and cramped following moderate strain, such as exercise, and in some cases, begin to break down. In other tissues, other subunits that make up the phosphofructokinase enzyme likely compensate for the lack of PFKM subunits, and the enzyme is able to retain some function. This compensation may help explain why other tissues are not affected by PFKM gene mutations. It is unclear why some individuals with GSDVII are affected with more severe forms of the disorder than others. Learn more about the gene associated with Glycogen storage disease type VII PFKM Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Glycogenosis 7 GSD VII GSD7 Muscle phosphofructokinase deficiency PFKM deficiency Phosphofructokinase deficiency Tarui disease Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Glycogen storage disease, type VII Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Glycogen storage disease due to muscle phosphofructokinase deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE VII; GSD7 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bruser A, Kirchberger J, Schoneberg T. Altered allosteric regulation of muscle
6-phosphofructokinase causes Tarui disease. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Oct
12;427(1):133-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.09.024. Epub 2012 Sep 17. Erratum In:
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Feb 8;431(2):367. Citation on PubMed Di Mauro S. Muscle glycogenoses: an overview. Acta Myol. 2007 Jul;26(1):35-41.
No abstract available. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Musumeci O, Bruno C, Mongini T, Rodolico C, Aguennouz M, Barca E, Amati A,
Cassandrini D, Serlenga L, Vita G, Toscano A. Clinical features and new molecular
findings in muscle phosphofructokinase deficiency (GSD type VII). Neuromuscul
Disord. 2012 Apr;22(4):325-30. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2011.10.022. Epub 2011 Nov 30. Citation on PubMed Toscano A, Musumeci O. Tarui disease and distal glycogenoses: clinical and
genetic update. Acta Myol. 2007 Oct;26(2):105-7. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Vives-Corrons JL, Koralkova P, Grau JM, Manu Pereira Mdel M, Van Wijk R. First
description of phosphofructokinase deficiency in spain: identification of a novel
homozygous missense mutation in the PFKM gene. Front Physiol. 2013 Dec 30;4:393.
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2013.00393. eCollection 2013. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Carbohydrate Metabolism Disorders Genetic Disorders Muscle Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Muscle cramps Weakness Related Medical Tests Creatine Kinase Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated April 1, 2014