Mal de Meleda: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Mal de Meleda URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/mal-de-meleda/ Mal de Meleda To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Mal de Meleda is a rare skin disorder that begins in early infancy. Affected individuals have a condition known as palmoplantar keratoderma, in which the skin of the palms of the hands and soles of the feet becomes thick, hard, and callused. In mal de Meleda, the thickened skin is also found on the back of the hands and feet and on the wrists and ankles. In addition, affected individuals may have rough, thick pads on the joints of the fingers and toes and on the elbows and knees. Some people with mal de Meleda have recurrent fungal infections in the thickened skin, which can lead to a strong odor. Other features of this disorder can include short fingers and toes (brachydactyly), nail abnormalities, red skin around the mouth, and excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis). Frequency Mal de Meleda is a rare disorder; its prevalence is unknown. The disorder was first identified on the Croatian island of Mljet (called Meleda in Italian) and has since been found in populations worldwide. Causes Mal de Meleda is caused by mutations in the SLURP1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that interacts with other proteins, called receptors, and is likely involved in signaling within cells. Studies show that the SLURP-1 protein can attach (bind) to nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) in the skin. Through interaction with these receptors, the SLURP-1 protein is thought to be involved in controlling the growth and division (proliferation), maturation (differentiation), and survival of skin cells. Mutations in the SLURP1 gene lead to little or no SLURP-1 protein in the body. It is unclear how a lack of this protein leads to the skin problems that occur in mal de Meleda. Researchers speculate that without SLURP-1, the activity of genes controlled by nAChR signaling is altered, leading to overgrowth of skin cells or survival of cells that normally would have died. The excess of cells can result in skin thickening. It is unclear why skin on the hands and feet is particularly affected. Learn more about the gene associated with Mal de Meleda SLURP1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Acroerythrokeratoderma Keratosis palmoplantaris transgrediens of Siemens Meleda disease Transgrediens palmoplantar keratoderma of Siemens Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Acroerythrokeratoderma Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Mal de Meleda Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MAL DE MELEDA; MDM Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Arredondo J, Chernyavsky AI, Webber RJ, Grando SA. Biological effects of
SLURP-1 on human keratinocytes. J Invest Dermatol. 2005 Dec;125(6):1236-41. doi:
10.1111/j.0022-202X.2005.23973.x. Citation on PubMed Chimienti F, Hogg RC, Plantard L, Lehmann C, Brakch N, Fischer J, Huber M,
Bertrand D, Hohl D. Identification of SLURP-1 as an epidermal neuromodulator
explains the clinical phenotype of Mal de Meleda. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Nov
15;12(22):3017-24. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg320. Epub 2003 Sep 23. Citation on PubMed Eckl KM, Stevens HP, Lestringant GG, Westenberger-Treumann M, Traupe H, Hinz
B, Frossard PM, Stadler R, Leigh IM, Nurnberg P, Reis A, Hennies HC. Mal de
Meleda (MDM) caused by mutations in the gene for SLURP-1 in patients from
Germany, Turkey, Palestine, and the United Arab Emirates. Hum Genet. 2003
Jan;112(1):50-6. doi: 10.1007/s00439-002-0838-8. Epub 2002 Oct 19. Citation on PubMed Favre B, Plantard L, Aeschbach L, Brakch N, Christen-Zaech S, de Viragh PA,
Sergeant A, Huber M, Hohl D. SLURP1 is a late marker of epidermal differentiation
and is absent in Mal de Meleda. J Invest Dermatol. 2007 Feb;127(2):301-8. doi:
10.1038/sj.jid.5700551. Epub 2006 Sep 28. Citation on PubMed Fischer J, Bouadjar B, Heilig R, Huber M, Lefevre C, Jobard F, Macari F,
Bakija-Konsuo A, Ait-Belkacem F, Weissenbach J, Lathrop M, Hohl D, Prud'homme JF.
Mutations in the gene encoding SLURP-1 in Mal de Meleda. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Apr
1;10(8):875-80. doi: 10.1093/hmg/10.8.875. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Skin Conditions MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated November 1, 2014