Bradyopsia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Bradyopsia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/bradyopsia/ Bradyopsia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Bradyopsia is a rare condition that affects vision. The term "bradyopsia" is from the Greek words for slow vision. In affected individuals, the eyes adapt more slowly than usual to changing light conditions. For example, people with this condition are blinded for several seconds when going from a dark environment into a bright one, such as when walking out of a darkened movie theater into daylight. Their eyes also have trouble adapting from bright light to dark conditions, such as when driving into a dark tunnel on a sunny day. Some people with bradyopsia also have difficulty seeing some moving objects, particularly small objects moving against a bright background. As a result, they often have trouble watching or participating in sports with a ball, such as soccer or tennis. People with bradyopsia can have reduced sharpness (acuity) of vision, although acuity may depend on the conditions under which vision is tested. Visual acuity may appear to be severely affected if it is tested under bright lights, but it can be near normal if tested in a dim environment. The ability to see colors and distinguish between them is normal. The vision problems associated with bradyopsia become apparent in early childhood. They are usually stable, which means they do not worsen over time. Frequency Bradyopsia appears to be rare. Only a few affected individuals worldwide have been described in the medical literature. Causes Bradyopsia can be caused by mutations in the RGS9 gene or in the RGS9BP gene (which is also known as R9AP ). These genes provide instructions for making proteins that are necessary for normal vision. The proteins are found in light-detecting cells in the eye called photoreceptors . When light enters the eye, it stimulates specialized pigments in these cells. This stimulation triggers a series of chemical reactions that produce an electrical signal, which is interpreted by the brain as vision. Once photoreceptors have been stimulated by light, they must return to their resting state before they can be stimulated again. The RGS9 and RGS9BP proteins play an essential role in returning photoreceptors to their resting state quickly after light exposure. Mutations in either the RGS9 or RGS9BP gene prevent photoreceptors from recovering quickly after responding to light. Normally they return to their resting state in a fraction of a second, but in people with mutations in one of these genes, it can take ten seconds or longer. During that time, the photoreceptors cannot respond to light. This delay causes temporary blindness in response to changing light conditions and interferes with seeing small objects when they are in motion. In some people with bradyopsia, no mutations in the RGS9 or RGS9BP gene have been found. The cause of the condition in these individuals is unknown. Learn more about the genes associated with Bradyopsia RGS9 RGS9BP Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition PERRS Prolonged electroretinal response suppression Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Bradyopsia Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Bradyopsia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PROLONGED ELECTRORETINAL RESPONSE SUPPRESSION 1; PERRS1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Cheng JY, Luu CD, Yong VH, Mathur R, Aung T, Vithana EN. Bradyopsia in an
Asian man. Arch Ophthalmol. 2007 Aug;125(8):1138-40. doi:
10.1001/archopht.125.8.1138. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Hartong DT, Pott JW, Kooijman AC. Six patients with bradyopsia (slow vision):
clinical features and course of the disease. Ophthalmology. 2007
Dec;114(12):2323-31. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2007.04.057. Epub 2007 Sep 12. Citation on PubMed Michaelides M, Li Z, Rana NA, Richardson EC, Hykin PG, Moore AT, Holder GE,
Webster AR. Novel mutations and electrophysiologic findings in RGS9- and
R9AP-associated retinal dysfunction (Bradyopsia). Ophthalmology. 2010
Jan;117(1):120-127.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2009.06.011. Epub 2009 Oct 8. Citation on PubMed Nishiguchi KM, Sandberg MA, Kooijman AC, Martemyanov KA, Pott JW, Hagstrom SA,
Arshavsky VY, Berson EL, Dryja TP. Defects in RGS9 or its anchor protein R9AP in
patients with slow photoreceptor deactivation. Nature. 2004 Jan 1;427(6969):75-8.
doi: 10.1038/nature02170. Citation on PubMed Vincent A, Robson AG, Holder GE. Pathognomonic (diagnostic) ERGs. A review and
update. Retina. 2013 Jan;33(1):5-12. doi: 10.1097/IAE.0b013e31827e2306. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Vision Impairment and Blindness MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Electroretinography Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated November 1, 2014