Mainzer-Saldino syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Mainzer-Saldino syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/mainzer-saldino-syndrome/ Mainzer-Saldino syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Mainzer-Saldino syndrome is a disorder characterized by kidney disease, eye problems, and skeletal abnormalities. People with Mainzer-Saldino syndrome have chronic kidney disease that begins in childhood and gets worse over time. The rate at which the kidney disease worsens is variable, but the condition eventually leads to kidney failure in most affected individuals. Degeneration of the light-sensitive tissue at the back of the eye (the retina ) almost always occurs in this disorder, but the age at which this feature develops varies. Some affected individuals are blind or have severe vision impairment beginning in infancy, with the pattern of vision loss resembling a condition called Leber congenital amaurosis . In other people with Mainzer-Saldino syndrome, the retinal degeneration begins in childhood, but some vision is retained into early adulthood. The vision loss in these affected individuals resembles a category of retinal disorders called rod-cone dystrophies. The most common rod-cone dystrophy is called retinitis pigmentosa , and the vision problems in Mainzer-Saldino syndrome are sometimes referred to as such. However, the abnormal deposits of pigment in the retina from which retinitis pigmentosa gets its name are often not found in Mainzer-Saldino syndrome. As a result, some researchers use terms such as "atypical retinitis pigmentosa without pigment" to describe the retinal degeneration that occurs in Mainzer-Saldino syndrome. The skeletal abnormality most characteristic of Mainzer-Saldino syndrome consists of cone-shaped ends of the bones ( epiphyses ) in the fingers (phalanges) that can be seen on x-ray images after the first year of life. Affected individuals may also have abnormalities of the thigh bones that occur in the epiphyses and adjacent areas where bone growth occurs (the metaphyses). Occasionally, other skeletal abnormalities occur, including short stature and premature fusion of certain skull bones ( craniosynostosis ) that affects the shape of the head and face. Affected individuals may also have a small rib cage, which sometimes causes breathing problems in infancy, but the breathing problems are usually mild. A small number of individuals with this disorder have additional problems affecting other organs. These can include liver disease resulting in a buildup of scar tissue in the liver (hepatic fibrosis); cerebellar ataxia, which is difficulty with coordination and balance arising from problems with a part of the brain called the cerebellum ; and mild intellectual disability. Frequency Mainzer-Saldino syndrome is a rare disorder; its prevalence is unknown. At least 20 cases have been reported. Causes Mainzer-Saldino syndrome is usually caused by mutations in the IFT140 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is involved in the formation and maintenance of cilia, which are microscopic, finger-like projections that stick out from the surface of cells and participate in signaling pathways that transmit information within and between cells. Cilia are important for the structure and function of many types of cells, including cells in the kidneys, liver, and brain. Light-sensing cells (photoreceptors) in the retina also contain cilia, which are essential for normal vision.  Cilia also play a role in the development of the bones, although the mechanism is not well understood. The movement of substances within cilia and similar structures called flagella is known as intraflagellar transport (IFT). This process is essential for the assembly and maintenance of these cell structures. During intraflagellar transport, cells use molecules called IFT particles to carry materials to and from the tips of cilia. IFT particles are made of proteins produced from related genes that belong to the IFT gene family. Each IFT particle is made up of two groups of IFT proteins: complex A, which includes at least six proteins, and complex B, which includes at least 15 proteins. The protein produced from the IFT140 gene forms part of IFT complex A (IFT-A). Mutations in the IFT140 gene that cause Mainzer-Saldino syndrome may change the shape of the IFT140 protein or affect its interactions with other IFT proteins, likely impairing the assembly of IFT-A and the development or maintenance of cilia. As a result, fewer cilia may be present or functional, affecting many organs and tissues in the body and resulting in the signs and symptoms of Mainzer-Saldino syndrome. Disorders such as Mainzer-Saldino syndrome that are caused by problems with cilia and involve bone abnormalities are called skeletal ciliopathies. While IFT140 gene mutations are believed to account for most cases of Mainzer-Saldino syndrome, mutations in additional genes that have not been identified may also cause this disorder. Learn more about the gene associated with Mainzer-Saldino syndrome IFT140 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Conorenal dysplasia Conorenal syndrome Mainzer-Saldino chondrodysplasia Mainzer-Saldino disease MZSDS Renal dysplasia, retinal pigmentary dystrophy, cerebellar ataxia, and skeletal dysplasia Saldino-Mainzer dysplasia Saldino-Mainzer syndrome Short-rib thoracic dysplasia 9 SRTD9 Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Saldino-Mainzer syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Saldino-Mainzer syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM SHORT-RIB THORACIC DYSPLASIA 9 WITH OR WITHOUT POLYDACTYLY; SRTD9 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Beals RK, Weleber RG. Conorenal dysplasia: a syndrome of cone-shaped
epiphysis, renal disease in childhood, retinitis pigmentosa and abnormality of
the proximal femur. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Oct 15;143A(20):2444-7. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.31948. Citation on PubMed Mortellaro C, Bello L, Pucci A, Lucchina AG, Migliario M. Saldino-Mainzer
syndrome: nephronophthisis, retinitis pigmentosa, and cone-shaped epiphyses. J
Craniofac Surg. 2010 Sep;21(5):1554-6. doi: 10.1097/SCS.0b013e3181ec69bb. Citation on PubMed Perrault I, Saunier S, Hanein S, Filhol E, Bizet AA, Collins F, Salih MA,
Gerber S, Delphin N, Bigot K, Orssaud C, Silva E, Baudouin V, Oud MM, Shannon N,
Le Merrer M, Roche O, Pietrement C, Goumid J, Baumann C, Bole-Feysot C, Nitschke
P, Zahrate M, Beales P, Arts HH, Munnich A, Kaplan J, Antignac C, Cormier-Daire
V, Rozet JM. Mainzer-Saldino syndrome is a ciliopathy caused by IFT140 mutations.
Am J Hum Genet. 2012 May 4;90(5):864-70. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.03.006. Epub
2012 Apr 12. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Schmidts M, Frank V, Eisenberger T, Al Turki S, Bizet AA, Antony D, Rix S,
Decker C, Bachmann N, Bald M, Vinke T, Toenshoff B, Di Donato N, Neuhann T,
Hartley JL, Maher ER, Bogdanovic R, Peco-Antic A, Mache C, Hurles ME, Joksic I,
Guc-Scekic M, Dobricic J, Brankovic-Magic M, Bolz HJ, Pazour GJ, Beales PL,
Scambler PJ, Saunier S, Mitchison HM, Bergmann C. Combined NGS approaches
identify mutations in the intraflagellar transport gene IFT140 in skeletal
ciliopathies with early progressive kidney Disease. Hum Mutat. 2013
May;34(5):714-24. doi: 10.1002/humu.22294. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Kidney Diseases Retinal Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Electroretinography Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated May 1, 2013