Short stature, hyperextensibility, hernia, ocular depression, Rieger anomaly, and teething delay: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Short stature, hyperextensibility, hernia, ocular depression, Rieger anomaly, and teething delay URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/short-stature-hyperextensibility-hernia-ocular-depression-rieger-anomaly-and-teething-delay/ Short stature, hyperextensibility, hernia, ocular depression, Rieger anomaly, and teething delay To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Short stature, hyperextensibility, hernia, ocular depression, Rieger anomaly, and teething delay, commonly known by the acronym SHORT syndrome, is a rare disorder that affects many parts of the body. Most people with SHORT syndrome are small at birth and gain weight slowly in childhood. Affected adults tend to have short stature compared with others in their family. Many have a lack of fatty tissue under the skin (lipoatrophy), primarily in the face, arms, and chest.  This lack of fat, together with thin, wrinkled skin and veins visible beneath the skin, makes affected individuals look older than their biological age. This appearance of premature aging is sometimes described as progeroid. Most people with SHORT syndrome have distinctive facial features. These include a triangular face shape with a prominent forehead and deep-set eyes (ocular depression), thin nostrils, a downturned mouth, and a small chin. Eye abnormalities are common in affected individuals, particularly Rieger anomaly, which affects structures at the front of the eye. Rieger anomaly can be associated with increased pressure in the eye ( glaucoma ) and vision loss. Some people with SHORT syndrome also have dental abnormalities such as delayed appearance (eruption) of teeth in early childhood, small teeth, fewer teeth than normal (hypodontia), and a lack of protective covering (enamel) on the surface of the teeth. Other signs and symptoms that have been reported in people with SHORT syndrome include immune system abnormalities, a kidney disorder known as nephrocalcinosis, hearing loss, loose ( hyperextensible ) joints, and a soft out-pouching in the lower abdomen called an inguinal hernia . A few affected individuals have developed problems with blood sugar (glucose) regulation including insulin resistance and diabetes. Most people with SHORT syndrome have normal intelligence, although a few have been reported with mild cognitive impairment or delayed development of speech in childhood. Frequency SHORT syndrome is a rare condition; its prevalence is unknown. Only a few affected individuals and families have been reported worldwide. Causes SHORT syndrome results from mutations in the PIK3R1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making one part (subunit) of an enzyme called PI3K, which plays a role in chemical signaling within cells. PI3K signaling is important for many cell activities, including cell growth and division, movement (migration) of cells, production of new proteins, transport of materials within cells, and cell survival. Studies suggest that PI3K signaling may be involved in the regulation of several hormones, including insulin , which helps control blood glucose levels . PI3K signaling may also play a role in the maturation of fat cells (adipocytes). Mutations in the PIK3R1 gene alter the structure of the subunit, which reduces the ability of PI3K to participate in cell signaling. Researchers are working to determine how these changes lead to the specific features of SHORT syndrome. PI3K's role in insulin activity may be related to the development of  insulin resistance and diabetes, and problems with adipocyte maturation might contribute to lipoatrophy in affected individuals. It is unclear how reduced PI3K signaling is associated with the other features of the condition. Learn more about the gene associated with Short stature, hyperextensibility, hernia, ocular depression, Rieger anomaly, and teething delay PIK3R1 Inheritance SHORT syndrome has an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, which means one copy of the altered PIK3R1 gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, the condition results from a new mutation in the gene and occurs in people with no history of the disorder in their family. In other cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent . Other Names for This Condition Growth retardation-Rieger anomaly Lipodystrophy, partial, with Rieger anomaly and short stature Short stature-hyperextensibility-Rieger anomaly-teething delay SHORT syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: SHORT syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center SHORT syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM SHORT SYNDROME Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Chudasama KK, Winnay J, Johansson S, Claudi T, Konig R, Haldorsen I, Johansson
B, Woo JR, Aarskog D, Sagen JV, Kahn CR, Molven A, Njolstad PR. SHORT syndrome
with partial lipodystrophy due to impaired phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase
signaling. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Jul 11;93(1):150-7. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.05.023. Epub 2013 Jun 27. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Dyment DA, Smith AC, Alcantara D, Schwartzentruber JA, Basel-Vanagaite L,
Curry CJ, Temple IK, Reardon W, Mansour S, Haq MR, Gilbert R, Lehmann OJ,
Vanstone MR, Beaulieu CL; FORGE Canada Consortium; Majewski J, Bulman DE,
O'Driscoll M, Boycott KM, Innes AM. Mutations in PIK3R1 cause SHORT syndrome. Am
J Hum Genet. 2013 Jul 11;93(1):158-66. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.06.005. Epub 2013
Jun 27. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Koenig R, Brendel L, Fuchs S. SHORT syndrome. Clin Dysmorphol. 2003
Jan;12(1):45-9. doi: 10.1097/00019605-200301000-00008. Citation on PubMed Schroeder C, Riess A, Bonin M, Bauer P, Riess O, Dobler-Neumann M, Wieser S,
Moog U, Tzschach A. PIK3R1 mutations in SHORT syndrome. Clin Genet. 2014
Sep;86(3):292-4. doi: 10.1111/cge.12263. Epub 2013 Oct 17. Citation on PubMed Thauvin-Robinet C, Auclair M, Duplomb L, Caron-Debarle M, Avila M, St-Onge J,
Le Merrer M, Le Luyer B, Heron D, Mathieu-Dramard M, Bitoun P, Petit JM, Odent S,
Amiel J, Picot D, Carmignac V, Thevenon J, Callier P, Laville M, Reznik Y, Fagour
C, Nunes ML, Capeau J, Lascols O, Huet F, Faivre L, Vigouroux C, Riviere JB.
PIK3R1 mutations cause syndromic insulin resistance with lipoatrophy. Am J Hum
Genet. 2013 Jul 11;93(1):141-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.05.019. Epub 2013 Jun
27. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Growth Disorders Metabolic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Glaucoma Hernia Nephrocalcinosis Short stature Tooth formation - delayed or absent Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 1, 2013