Multiple pterygium syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Multiple pterygium syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/multiple-pterygium-syndrome/ Multiple pterygium syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Multiple pterygium syndrome is a condition that is evident before birth with webbing of the skin (pterygium) at the joints and a lack of muscle movement (akinesia) before birth. Akinesia frequently results in muscle weakness and joint deformities called contractures that restrict the movement of joints (arthrogryposis). As a result, multiple pterygium syndrome can lead to further problems with movement such as arms and legs that cannot fully extend. The two forms of multiple pterygium syndrome are differentiated by the severity of their symptoms. Multiple pterygium syndrome, Escobar type (sometimes referred to as Escobar syndrome) is the milder of the two types. Lethal multiple pterygium syndrome is fatal before birth or very soon after birth. In people with multiple pterygium syndrome, Escobar type, the webbing typically affects the skin of the neck , fingers, forearms, inner thighs, and backs of the knee. People with this type may also have arthrogryposis. A side-to-side curvature of the spine ( scoliosis ) is sometimes seen. Affected individuals may also have respiratory distress at birth due to underdeveloped lungs (lung hypoplasia). People with multiple pterygium syndrome, Escobar type usually have distinctive facial features including droopy eyelids ( ptosis ), outside corners of the eyes that point downward ( downslanting palpebral fissures ), skin folds covering the inner corner of the eyes ( epicanthal folds ), a small jaw , and low-set ears. Males with this condition can have undescended testes (cryptorchidism). This condition does not worsen after birth, and affected individuals typically do not have muscle weakness later in life. Lethal multiple pterygium syndrome has many of the same signs and symptoms as the Escobar type. In addition, affected fetuses may develop a buildup of excess fluid in the body (hydrops fetalis) or a fluid-filled sac typically found on the back of the neck (cystic hygroma). Individuals with this type have severe arthrogryposis. Lethal multiple pterygium syndrome is associated with abnormalities such as underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the heart, lung, or brain; twisting of the intestines (intestinal malrotation); kidney abnormalities; an opening in the roof of the mouth ( a cleft palate ); and an unusually small head size ( microcephaly ). Affected individuals may also develop a hole in the muscle that separates the abdomen from the chest cavity (the diaphragm), a condition called a congenital diaphragmatic hernia . Lethal multiple pterygium syndrome is typically fatal in the second or third trimester of pregnancy. Frequency The prevalence of multiple pterygium syndrome is unknown. Causes Mutations in the CHRNG gene cause most cases of multiple pterygium syndrome, Escobar type and a smaller percentage of cases of lethal multiple pterygium syndrome. The CHRNG gene provides instructions for making the gamma (γ) protein component (subunit) of the acetylcholine receptor (AChR) protein. The AChR protein is found in the membrane of skeletal muscle cells and is critical for signaling between nerve and muscle cells . Signaling between these cells is necessary for movement. The AChR protein consists of five subunits. The γ subunit is found only in the fetal AChR protein. At about the thirty-third week of pregnancy, the γ subunit is replaced by another subunit to form adult AChR protein. The replacement of fetal AChR by adult AChR is the reason most people with multiple pterygium syndrome, Escobar type do not have problems with muscle movement after birth. CHRNG gene mutations result in an impaired or missing γ subunit. The severity of the CHRNG gene mutation influences the severity of the condition. Typically, mutations that prevent the production of any γ subunit will result in the lethal type, while mutations that allow the production of some γ subunit will lead to the Escobar type. Without a functional γ subunit, the fetal AChR protein cannot be assembled or properly placed in the muscle cell membrane. As a result, the fetal AChR protein cannot function and the communication between nerve cells and muscle cells in the developing fetus is impaired. A lack of signaling between nerve and muscle cells leads to akinesia and pterygium before birth, and may result in many of the other signs and symptoms of multiple pterygium syndrome. Mutations in other genes, most providing instructions for other AChR protein subunits, have been found to cause multiple pterygium syndrome. Changes in these genes can cause both the lethal and Escobar types of this condition, although they account for only a small number of cases. Some people with multiple pterygium syndrome do not have an identified mutation in any of the known genes associated with this condition. The cause of the disease in these individuals is unknown. Learn more about the genes associated with Multiple pterygium syndrome CHRNG RAPSN Additional Information from NCBI Gene: CHRNA1 CHRND Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Escobar syndrome Familial pterygium syndrome Pterygium syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Autosomal recessive multiple pterygium syndrome Genetic Testing Registry: Lethal multiple pterygium syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Autosomal recessive multiple pterygium syndrome Lethal multiple pterygium syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MULTIPLE PTERYGIUM SYNDROME, LETHAL TYPE; LMPS MULTIPLE PTERYGIUM SYNDROME, ESCOBAR VARIANT; EVMPS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Cox PM, Brueton LA, Bjelogrlic P, Pomroy P, Sewry CA. Diversity of
neuromuscular pathology in lethal multiple pterygium syndrome. Pediatr Dev
Pathol. 2003 Jan-Feb;6(1):59-68. doi: 10.1007/s10024-002-0042-9. Epub 2002 Nov 7. Citation on PubMed Hoffmann K, Muller JS, Stricker S, Megarbane A, Rajab A, Lindner TH, Cohen M,
Chouery E, Adaimy L, Ghanem I, Delague V, Boltshauser E, Talim B, Horvath R,
Robinson PN, Lochmuller H, Hubner C, Mundlos S. Escobar syndrome is a prenatal
myasthenia caused by disruption of the acetylcholine receptor fetal gamma
subunit. Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Aug;79(2):303-12. doi: 10.1086/506257. Epub 2006
Jun 20. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Michalk A, Stricker S, Becker J, Rupps R, Pantzar T, Miertus J, Botta G,
Naretto VG, Janetzki C, Yaqoob N, Ott CE, Seelow D, Wieczorek D, Fiebig B, Wirth
B, Hoopmann M, Walther M, Korber F, Blankenburg M, Mundlos S, Heller R, Hoffmann
K. Acetylcholine receptor pathway mutations explain various fetal akinesia
deformation sequence disorders. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Feb;82(2):464-76. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2007.11.006. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Morgan NV, Brueton LA, Cox P, Greally MT, Tolmie J, Pasha S, Aligianis IA, van
Bokhoven H, Marton T, Al-Gazali L, Morton JE, Oley C, Johnson CA, Trembath RC,
Brunner HG, Maher ER. Mutations in the embryonal subunit of the acetylcholine
receptor (CHRNG) cause lethal and Escobar variants of multiple pterygium
syndrome. Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Aug;79(2):390-5. doi: 10.1086/506256. Epub 2006
Jun 20. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Parashar SY, Anderson PJ, McLean N, Djohansjah M, David DJ. Spectrum of
features in pterygium syndrome. Asian J Surg. 2006 Apr;29(2):104-8. doi:
10.1016/S1015-9584(09)60118-4. Citation on PubMed Vogt J, Harrison BJ, Spearman H, Cossins J, Vermeer S, ten Cate LN, Morgan NV,
Beeson D, Maher ER. Mutation analysis of CHRNA1, CHRNB1, CHRND, and RAPSN genes
in multiple pterygium syndrome/fetal akinesia patients. Am J Hum Genet. 2008
Jan;82(1):222-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2007.09.016. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Neuromuscular Disorders Skin Conditions MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Contracture deformity Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated November 1, 2011