Potassium-aggravated myotonia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Potassium-aggravated myotonia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/potassium-aggravated-myotonia/ Potassium-aggravated myotonia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Potassium-aggravated myotonia is a disorder that affects muscles used for movement (skeletal muscles). Beginning in childhood or adolescence, people with this condition experience episodes of sustained muscle tensing (myotonia) that prevent muscles from relaxing. Myotonia causes muscle stiffness that worsens after exercise. In this disorder, episodes of myotonia may also be triggered (aggravated) by eating foods that are high in the mineral potassium, such as bananas and potatoes. During these episodes, stiffness occurs in skeletal muscles throughout the body. Potassium-aggravated myotonia ranges in severity from mild episodes of muscle stiffness (myotonia fluctuans) to severe, disabling disease with frequent attacks (myotonia permanen). Unlike some other forms of myotonia, potassium-aggravated myotonia is not associated with episodes of muscle weakness. Frequency This condition appears to be rare; it has been reported in a small number of individuals and families worldwide. Causes Potassium-aggravated myotonia is caused by variants (also known as mutations) in the SCN4A gene. The SCN4A gene provides instructions for making a protein that is critical for the normal function of skeletal muscle cells. For the body to move, skeletal muscles must tense (contract) and relax in a coordinated way. Muscle contractions are triggered by the flow of positively charged atoms (ions), including sodium, into skeletal muscle cells. The SCN4A protein forms channels that control the flow of sodium ions into these cells. Variants in the SCN4A gene alter the usual structure and function of sodium channels. The altered channels cannot properly regulate ion flow, increasing the movement of sodium ions into skeletal muscle cells. When excess potassium is present in the body, which occurs after eating potassium-rich foods, even more sodium ions flow into skeletal muscle cells in order to maintain a proper balance of calcium and potassium. The influx of extra sodium ions triggers prolonged muscle contractions, which are characteristic of myotonia. Learn more about the gene associated with Potassium-aggravated myotonia SCN4A Inheritance Potassium-aggravated myotonia is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In some cases, an affected person inherits a variant in the SCN4A gene from one affected parent . Other cases result from new variants in the gene .  These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Other Names for This Condition PAM Sodium channel myotonia Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Potassium-aggravated myotonia Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Potassium-aggravated myotonia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MYOTONIA, POTASSIUM-AGGRAVATED Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Desaphy JF, Carbonara R, D'Amico A, Modoni A, Roussel J, Imbrici P, Pagliarani
S, Lucchiari S, Lo Monaco M, Conte Camerino D. Translational approach to address
therapy in myotonia permanens due to a new SCN4A mutation. Neurology. 2016 May
31;86(22):2100-8. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002721. Epub 2016 Apr 29. Citation on PubMed Lehmann-Horn F, Orth M, Kuhn M, Jurkat-Rott K. A novel N440K sodium channel
mutation causes myotonia with exercise-induced weakness--exclusion of CLCN1 exon
deletion/duplication by MLPA. Acta Myol. 2011 Oct;30(2):133-7. Citation on PubMed Stunnenberg BC, LoRusso S, Arnold WD, Barohn RJ, Cannon SC, Fontaine B, Griggs
RC, Hanna MG, Matthews E, Meola G, Sansone VA, Trivedi JR, van Engelen BGM,
Vicart S, Statland JM. Guidelines on clinical presentation and management of
nondystrophic myotonias. Muscle Nerve. 2020 Oct;62(4):430-444. doi:
10.1002/mus.26887. Epub 2020 May 27. Citation on PubMed Torbergsen T, Jurkat-Rott K, Stalberg EV, Loseth S, Hodneo A, Lehmann-Horn F.
Painful cramps and giant myotonic discharges in a family with the Nav1.4-G1306A
mutation. Muscle Nerve. 2015 Oct;52(4):680-3. doi: 10.1002/mus.24672. Epub 2015
Jun 30. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Muscle Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Potassium in diet Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 5, 2021