Methemoglobinemia, beta-globin type: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Methemoglobinemia, beta-globin type URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/methemoglobinemia-beta-globin-type/ Methemoglobinemia, beta-globin type To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Methemoglobinemia, beta-globin type is a condition that affects the function of red blood cells. Specifically, it alters a molecule called hemoglobin within these cells. Hemoglobin within red blood cells attaches (binds) to oxygen molecules in the lungs , which it carries through the bloodstream, then releases in tissues throughout the body. Instead of normal hemoglobin, people with methemoglobinemia, beta-globin type have an abnormal form called methemoglobin, which is unable to efficiently deliver oxygen to the body's tissues. In methemoglobinemia, beta-globin type, the abnormal hemoglobin gives the blood a brown color. It also causes a bluish appearance of the skin, lips, and nails (cyanosis), which usually first appears around the age of 6 months. The signs and symptoms of methemoglobinemia, beta-globin type are generally limited to cyanosis, which does not cause any health problems. However, in rare cases, severe methemoglobinemia, beta-globin type can cause headaches, weakness, and fatigue. Frequency The incidence of methemoglobinemia, beta-globin type is unknown. Causes Methemoglobinemia, beta-globin type is caused by mutations in the HBB gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called beta-globin. Beta-globin is one of four components (subunits) that make up hemoglobin. In adults, hemoglobin normally contains two subunits of beta-globin and two subunits of another protein called alpha-globin. Each of these protein subunits is bound to an iron-containing molecule called heme ; each heme contains an iron molecule in its center that can bind to one oxygen molecule. For hemoglobin to bind to oxygen, the iron within the heme molecule needs to be in a form called ferrous iron (Fe 2+ ). The iron within the heme can change to another form of iron called ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), which cannot bind oxygen. Hemoglobin that contains ferric iron is known as methemoglobin. HBB gene mutations that cause methemoglobinemia, beta-globin type change the structure of beta-globin and promote the heme iron to change from ferrous to ferric. The ferric iron cannot bind oxygen and causes cyanosis and the brown appearance of blood. Learn more about the gene associated with Methemoglobinemia, beta-globin type HBB Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition Blue baby syndrome Congenital methemoglobinemia Hemoglobin M disease Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: METHEMOGLOBINEMIA, BETA TYPE Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Hemoglobin M disease Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM HEMOGLOBIN--BETA LOCUS; HBB Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References do Nascimento TS, Pereira RO, de Mello HL, Costa J. Methemoglobinemia: from
diagnosis to treatment. Rev Bras Anestesiol. 2008 Nov-Dec;58(6):651-64. doi:
10.1590/s0034-70942008000600011. English, Portuguese. Citation on PubMed Melarkode K, Prinzhausen H. Hemoglobin M variant and congenital
methemoglobinemia: methylene blue will not be effective in the presence of
hemoglobin M. Can J Anaesth. 2008 Feb;55(2):129-30. doi: 10.1007/BF03016328. No
abstract available. Citation on PubMed Percy MJ, McFerran NV, Lappin TR. Disorders of oxidised haemoglobin. Blood
Rev. 2005 Mar;19(2):61-8. doi: 10.1016/j.blre.2004.02.001. Citation on PubMed Rehman HU. Methemoglobinemia. West J Med. 2001 Sep;175(3):193-6. doi:
10.1136/ewjm.175.3.193. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Skold A, Cosco DL, Klein R. Methemoglobinemia: pathogenesis, diagnosis, and
management. South Med J. 2011 Nov;104(11):757-61. doi:
10.1097/SMJ.0b013e318232139f. Citation on PubMed Thom CS, Dickson CF, Gell DA, Weiss MJ. Hemoglobin variants: biochemical
properties and clinical correlates. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2013 Mar
1;3(3):a011858. doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a011858. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Blood Disorders Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Blue discoloration of the skin Genetics Hemoglobin Methemoglobinemia Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated July 1, 2015