Townes-Brocks Syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Townes-Brocks Syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/townes-brocks-syndrome/ Townes-Brocks Syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Townes-Brocks syndrome is a genetic condition that affects several parts of the body. The most common features of this condition are a malformation of the anal opening (imperforate anus), abnormally shaped ears, and hand malformations that most often affect the thumbs. People with this condition often have at least two of these three major features. Other signs and symptoms of Townes-Brocks syndrome can include kidney abnormalities, mild to profound hearing loss, eye abnormalities, heart defects, foot abnormalities, and genital malformations. These features vary among affected individuals, even within the same family. Mild intellectual disability or learning problems have been reported in about 10 percent of people with Townes-Brocks syndrome. Frequency The prevalence of this condition is unknown. It is difficult to determine how frequently Townes-Brocks syndrome occurs because the varied signs and symptoms of this disorder overlap with those of other genetic syndromes. Causes Mutations in the SALL1 gene cause Townes-Brocks Syndrome. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is involved in development before birth. The SALL1 protein acts as a transcription factor, which means it attaches (binds) to specific regions of DNA and helps control the activity of particular genes that direct the formation of many different tissues and organs before birth. It is uncertain how SALL1 gene mutations result in the features of Townes-Brocks syndrome. Most mutations lead to the production of an abnormally short version of the SALL1 protein that malfunctions within the cell. The malfunctioning protein is thought to interfere with normal copies of the SALL1 protein, which are produced from the other copy of the SALL1 gene that does not have a mutation. This interference prevents the normal proteins from regulating gene activity. In addition, the malfunctioning protein may interact with other proteins, disrupting their function. For example, some research indicates that the abnormally short SALL1 protein interferes with proteins that control the formation of cellular structures called cilia. Cilia are important for the structure and function of many types of cells and the normal development of several tissues. Abnormalities in cilia can disrupt development and may contribute to the features of Townes-Brocks syndrome. Some rare mutations prevent the gene from making any protein; this reduces by half the amount of SALL1 protein produced in cells. A shortage of functioning SALL1 protein, due to either type of mutation, likely impairs the regulation of genes that direct the development of many different organs and tissues before birth. Interference by the malfunctioning SALL1 protein, if present, may disrupt other developmental processes and contribute to the birth defects associated with Townes-Brocks syndrome. Learn more about the gene associated with Townes-Brocks Syndrome SALL1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition Anal-ear-renal-radial malformation syndrome Deafness-imperforate anus-hypoplastic thumbs syndrome Imperforate anus-hand and foot anomalies syndrome Renal-ear-anal-radial syndrome (REAR) Sensorineural deafness-imperforate anus-hypoplastic thumbs syndrome Townes syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Townes-Brocks syndrome 1 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Townes-Brocks syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM TOWNES-BROCKS SYNDROME 1; TBS1 TOWNES-BROCKS SYNDROME 2; TBS2 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Botzenhart EM, Bartalini G, Blair E, Brady AF, Elmslie F, Chong KL, Christy K,
Torres-Martinez W, Danesino C, Deardorff MA, Fryns JP, Marlin S, Garcia-Minaur S,
Hellenbroich Y, Hay BN, Penttinen M, Shashi V, Terhal P, Van Maldergem L,
Whiteford ML, Zackai E, Kohlhase J. Townes-Brocks syndrome: twenty novel SALL1
mutations in sporadic and familial cases and refinement of the SALL1 hot spot
region. Hum Mutat. 2007 Feb;28(2):204-5. doi: 10.1002/humu.9476. Citation on PubMed Botzenhart EM, Green A, Ilyina H, Konig R, Lowry RB, Lo IF, Shohat M, Burke L,
McGaughran J, Chafai R, Pierquin G, Michaelis RC, Whiteford ML, Simola KO, Rosler
B, Kohlhase J. SALL1 mutation analysis in Townes-Brocks syndrome: twelve novel
mutations and expansion of the phenotype. Hum Mutat. 2005 Sep;26(3):282. doi:
10.1002/humu.9362. Citation on PubMed Bozal-Basterra L, Martin-Ruiz I, Pirone L, Liang Y, Sigurethsson JO,
Gonzalez-Santamarta M, Giordano I, Gabicagogeascoa E, de Luca A, Rodriguez JA,
Wilkie AOM, Kohlhase J, Eastwood D, Yale C, Olsen JV, Rauchman M, Anderson KV,
Sutherland JD, Barrio R. Truncated SALL1 Impedes Primary Cilia Function in
Townes-Brocks Syndrome. Am J Hum Genet. 2018 Feb 1;102(2):249-265. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.12.017. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central de Celis JF, Barrio R. Regulation and function of Spalt proteins during animal
development. Int J Dev Biol. 2009;53(8-10):1385-98. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.072408jd. Citation on PubMed Graziano C, Olivucci G. SALL1-Related Townes-Brocks Syndrome. 2007
Jan 24 [updated 2024 Aug 8]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace
SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA):
University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1445/ Citation on PubMed Keegan CE, Mulliken JB, Wu BL, Korf BR. Townes-Brocks syndrome versus expanded
spectrum hemifacial microsomia: review of eight patients and further evidence of
a "hot spot" for mutation in the SALL1 gene. Genet Med. 2001 Jul-Aug;3(4):310-3.
doi: 10.1097/00125817-200107000-00007. Citation on PubMed Kiefer SM, Ohlemiller KK, Yang J, McDill BW, Kohlhase J, Rauchman M.
Expression of a truncated Sall1 transcriptional repressor is responsible for
Townes-Brocks syndrome birth defects. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Sep 1;12(17):2221-7.
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg233. Epub 2003 Jul 15. Citation on PubMed Powell CM, Michaelis RC. Townes-Brocks syndrome. J Med Genet. 1999
Feb;36(2):89-93. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Hand Injuries and Disorders Hearing Disorders and Deafness Kidney Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Ear Disorders (Image) Genetics Imperforate anus Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 1, 2020