Familial paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Familial paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/familial-paroxysmal-nonkinesigenic-dyskinesia/ Familial paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Familial paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia is a disorder of the nervous system that causes episodes of involuntary movement. Paroxysmal indicates that the abnormal movements come and go over time. Nonkinesigenic means that episodes are not triggered by sudden movement. Dyskinesia broadly refers to involuntary movement of the body. People with familial paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia experience episodes of abnormal movement that are brought on by alcohol, caffeine, stress, fatigue, menses, or excitement or develop without a known cause. Episodes are not induced by exercise or sudden movement and do not occur during sleep. An episode is characterized by irregular, jerking or shaking movements that range from mild to severe. In this disorder, the dyskinesia can include slow, prolonged contraction of muscles (dystonia); small, fast, "dance-like" motions (chorea); writhing movements of the limbs (athetosis); and, rarely, flailing movements of the limbs (ballismus). The dyskinesia also affects muscles in the torso and face. The type of abnormal movement varies among affected individuals, even among affected members of the same family. Individuals with familial paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia do not lose consciousness during an episode. Most people do not experience any neurological symptoms between episodes. Individuals with familial paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia usually begin to show signs and symptoms of the disorder during childhood or their early teens. Episodes typically last 1 to 4 hours, and the frequency of episodes ranges from several per day to one per year. In some affected individuals, episodes occur less often with age. Frequency Familial paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia is a very rare disorder. Its prevalence is estimated to be 1 in 5 million people. Causes Mutations in the PNKD gene can cause familial paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia. The function of the protein produced from the PNKD gene is unknown, although it is thought to play an important role in normal brain function. The PNKD protein may help control the release of chemicals in the brain called neurotransmitters , which allow nerve cells (neurons) to communicate with each other. The PNKD protein is similar to a protein that helps break down a chemical called methylglyoxal. Methylglyoxal is found in alcoholic beverages, coffee, tea, and cola. Research has demonstrated that this chemical has a toxic effect on neurons. It remains unclear if the PNKD gene is related to the breakdown of methylglyoxal or another substance in the body. How mutations in the PNKD gene lead to the signs and symptoms of familial paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia is also unknown. In some families with familial paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia, the condition is not caused by a mutation in the PNKD gene. Researchers suspect that mutations in one or more other genes that have not been identified can cause the condition. Learn more about the gene associated with Familial paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia PNKD Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is typically sufficient to cause the disorder. In all reported cases caused by PNKD gene mutations, an affected person has inherited the mutation from one parent. A small number of people with the altered gene have not developed signs and symptoms of the condition, a situation known as reduced penetrance. Other Names for This Condition Familial paroxysmal choreoathetosis Mount-Reback syndrome Nonkinesigenic choreoathetosis Paroxysmal dystonic choreoathetosis Paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia PDC PNKD Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia Genetic Testing Registry: Paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia 2 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Paroxysmal non-kinesigenic dyskinesia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PAROXYSMAL NONKINESIGENIC DYSKINESIA 1; PNKD1 PAROXYSMAL NONKINESIGENIC DYSKINESIA 2; PNKD2 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bruno MK, Lee HY, Auburger GW, Friedman A, Nielsen JE, Lang AE, Bertini E, Van
Bogaert P, Averyanov Y, Hallett M, Gwinn-Hardy K, Sorenson B, Pandolfo M,
Kwiecinski H, Servidei S, Fu YH, Ptacek L. Genotype-phenotype correlation of
paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia. Neurology. 2007 May 22;68(21):1782-9. doi:
10.1212/01.wnl.0000262029.91552.e0. Citation on PubMed Chen DH, Matsushita M, Rainier S, Meaney B, Tisch L, Feleke A, Wolff J, Lipe
H, Fink J, Bird TD, Raskind WH. Presence of alanine-to-valine substitutions in
myofibrillogenesis regulator 1 in paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia:
confirmation in 2 kindreds. Arch Neurol. 2005 Apr;62(4):597-600. doi:
10.1001/archneur.62.4.597. Citation on PubMed Erro R. Familial Paroxysmal Nonkinesigenic Dyskinesia. 2005 Jun 24 [updated
2019 Apr 4]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A,
editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of
Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1221/ Citation on PubMed Gardiner AR, Jaffer F, Dale RC, Labrum R, Erro R, Meyer E, Xiromerisiou G,
Stamelou M, Walker M, Kullmann D, Warner T, Jarman P, Hanna M, Kurian MA, Bhatia
KP, Houlden H. The clinical and genetic heterogeneity of paroxysmal dyskinesias.
Brain. 2015 Dec;138(Pt 12):3567-80. doi: 10.1093/brain/awv310. Epub 2015 Nov 23. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Lee HY, Xu Y, Huang Y, Ahn AH, Auburger GW, Pandolfo M, Kwiecinski H, Grimes
DA, Lang AE, Nielsen JE, Averyanov Y, Servidei S, Friedman A, Van Bogaert P,
Abramowicz MJ, Bruno MK, Sorensen BF, Tang L, Fu YH, Ptacek LJ. The gene for
paroxysmal non-kinesigenic dyskinesia encodes an enzyme in a stress response
pathway. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Dec 15;13(24):3161-70. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddh330. Epub
2004 Oct 20. Citation on PubMed Shen Y, Ge WP, Li Y, Hirano A, Lee HY, Rohlmann A, Missler M, Tsien RW, Jan
LY, Fu YH, Ptacek LJ. Protein mutated in paroxysmal dyskinesia interacts with the
active zone protein RIM and suppresses synaptic vesicle exocytosis. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 10;112(10):2935-41. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1501364112. Epub
2015 Feb 17. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Shen Y, Lee HY, Rawson J, Ojha S, Babbitt P, Fu YH, Ptacek LJ. Mutations in
PNKD causing paroxysmal dyskinesia alters protein cleavage and stability. Hum Mol
Genet. 2011 Jun 15;20(12):2322-32. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr125. Epub 2011 Apr 12. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Movement Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2017