Prothrombin deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Prothrombin deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/prothrombin-deficiency/ Prothrombin deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Prothrombin deficiency is a bleeding disorder that slows the blood clotting process . People with this condition often experience prolonged bleeding following an injury, surgery, or having a tooth pulled. In severe cases of prothrombin deficiency, heavy bleeding occurs after minor trauma or even in the absence of injury (spontaneous bleeding). Women with prothrombin deficiency can have prolonged and sometimes abnormally heavy menstrual bleeding.  Serious complications can result from bleeding into the joints, muscles, brain, or other internal organs. Milder forms of prothrombin deficiency do not involve spontaneous bleeding, and the condition may only become apparent following surgery or a serious injury. Frequency Prothrombin deficiency is very rare; it is estimated to affect 1 in 2 million people in the general population. Causes Mutations in the F2 gene cause prothrombin deficiency.  The F2 gene provides instructions for making the prothrombin protein (also called coagulation factor II), which plays a critical role in the formation of blood clots in response to injury.  Prothrombin is the precursor to thrombin, a protein that initiates a series of chemical reactions to form a blood clot.  After an injury, clots protect the body by sealing off damaged blood vessels and preventing further blood loss. F2 gene mutations reduce the production of prothrombin in cells, which prevents clots from forming properly in response to injury.  Problems with blood clotting can lead to excessive bleeding.  Some mutations drastically reduce the activity of prothrombin and can lead to severe bleeding episodes.  Other F2 gene mutations allow for a moderate amount of prothrombin activity, typically resulting in mild bleeding episodes. Learn more about the gene associated with Prothrombin deficiency F2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Dysprothrombinemia Factor II deficiency Hypoprothrombinemia Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital prothrombin deficiency Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Congenital factor II deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PROTHROMBIN DEFICIENCY, CONGENITAL Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Akhavan S, Mannucci PM, Lak M, Mancuso G, Mazzucconi MG, Rocino A, Jenkins PV,
Perkins SJ. Identification and three-dimensional structural analysis of nine
novel mutations in patients with prothrombin deficiency. Thromb Haemost. 2000
Dec;84(6):989-97. Citation on PubMed Jayandharan G, Viswabandya A, Baidya S, Nair SC, Shaji RV, Chandy M,
Srivastava A. Molecular genetics of hereditary prothrombin deficiency in Indian
patients: identification of a novel Ala362 --> Thr (Prothrombin Vellore 1)
mutation. J Thromb Haemost. 2005 Jul;3(7):1446-53. doi:
10.1111/j.1538-7836.2005.01402.x. Citation on PubMed Lefkowitz JB, Weller A, Nuss R, Santiago-Borrero PJ, Brown DL, Ortiz IR. A
common mutation, Arg457-->Gln, links prothrombin deficiencies in the Puerto
Rican population. J Thromb Haemost. 2003 Nov;1(11):2381-8. doi:
10.1046/j.1538-7836.2003.00420.x. Citation on PubMed Wong AY, Hewitt J, Clarke BJ, Hudson DM, Krisinger MJ, Dower NA, MacGillivray
RT. Severe prothrombin deficiency caused by prothrombin-Edmonton (R-4Q) combined
with a previously undetected deletion. J Thromb Haemost. 2006 Dec;4(12):2623-8.
doi: 10.1111/j.1538-7836.2006.02235.x. Epub 2006 Sep 26. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Bleeding Disorders Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Prothrombin deficiency Related Medical Tests Coagulation Factor Tests Prothrombin Time Test and INR (PT/INR) Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated November 1, 2013