Essential pentosuria: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Essential pentosuria URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/essential-pentosuria/ Essential pentosuria To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Essential pentosuria is a condition characterized by high levels of a sugar called L-xylulose in urine. The condition is so named because L-xylulose is a type of sugar called a pentose. Despite the excess sugar, affected individuals have no associated health problems. Frequency Essential pentosuria occurs almost exclusively in individuals with Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry. Approximately 1 in 3,300 people in this population are affected. Causes Essential pentosuria is caused by mutations in the DCXR gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called dicarbonyl and L-xylulose reductase (DCXR), which plays multiple roles in the body. One of its functions is to perform a chemical reaction that converts a sugar called L-xylulose to a molecule called xylitol. This reaction is one step in a process by which the body can use sugars for energy. DCXR gene mutations lead to the production of altered DCXR proteins that are quickly broken down. Without this protein, L-xylulose is not converted to xylitol, and the excess sugar is released in the urine. While essential pentosuria is caused by genetic mutations, some people develop a non-inherited form of pentosuria if they eat excessive amounts of fruits high in L-xylulose or another pentose called L-arabinose. This form of the condition, which disappears if the diet is changed, is referred to as alimentary pentosuria. Studies show that some drugs can also cause a form of temporary pentosuria called drug-induced pentosuria. These non-inherited forms of the condition also do not cause any health problems. Learn more about the gene associated with Essential pentosuria DCXR Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Essential benign pentosuria L-xylulose reductase deficiency L-xylulosuria Pentosuria Xylitol dehydrogenase deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Essential pentosuria Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PENTOSURIA; PNTSU Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Ebert B, Kisiela M, Maser E. Human DCXR - another 'moonlighting protein'
involved in sugar metabolism, carbonyl detoxification, cell adhesion and male
fertility? Biol Rev Camb Philos Soc. 2015 Feb;90(1):254-78. doi:
10.1111/brv.12108. Epub 2014 Apr 10. Citation on PubMed Lane AB. On the nature of L-xylulose reductase deficiency in essential
pentosuria. Biochem Genet. 1985 Feb;23(1-2):61-72. doi: 10.1007/BF00499113. Citation on PubMed Lee SK, Son le T, Choi HJ, Ahnn J. Dicarbonyl/l-xylulose reductase (DCXR): The
multifunctional pentosuria enzyme. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013
Nov;45(11):2563-7. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2013.08.010. Epub 2013 Aug 27. Citation on PubMed Nakagawa J, Ishikura S, Asami J, Isaji T, Usami N, Hara A, Sakurai T,
Tsuritani K, Oda K, Takahashi M, Yoshimoto M, Otsuka N, Kitamura K. Molecular
characterization of mammalian dicarbonyl/L-xylulose reductase and its
localization in kidney. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 17;277(20):17883-91. doi:
10.1074/jbc.M110703200. Epub 2002 Mar 6. Citation on PubMed Pierce SB, Spurrell CH, Mandell JB, Lee MK, Zeligson S, Bereman MS, Stray SM,
Fokstuen S, MacCoss MJ, Levy-Lahad E, King MC, Motulsky AG. Garrod's fourth
inborn error of metabolism solved by the identification of mutations causing
pentosuria. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Nov 8;108(45):18313-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1115888108. Epub 2011 Oct 31. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Carbohydrate Metabolism Disorders Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated January 1, 2015