Cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/cytogenetically-normal-acute-myeloid-leukemia/ Cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia (CN-AML) is one form of a cancer of the blood-forming tissue (bone marrow) called acute myeloid leukemia. In normal bone marrow, early blood cells called hematopoietic stem cells develop into several types of blood cells: white blood cells (leukocytes) that protect the body from infection, red blood cells (erythrocytes) that carry oxygen, and platelets (thrombocytes) that are involved in blood clotting . In acute myeloid leukemia , the bone marrow makes large numbers of abnormal, immature white blood cells called myeloid blasts. Instead of developing into normal white blood cells, the myeloid blasts develop into cancerous leukemia cells. The large number of abnormal cells in the bone marrow interferes with the production of functional white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. People with CN-AML have a shortage of all types of mature blood cells: a shortage of white blood cells (leukopenia) leads to increased susceptibility to infections, a low number of red blood cells ( anemia ) causes fatigue and weakness, and a reduction in the amount of platelets (thrombocytopenia) can result in easy bruising and abnormal bleeding. Other symptoms of CN-AML may include fever and weight loss. The age at which CN-AML begins ranges from childhood to late adulthood. CN-AML is said to be an intermediate-risk cancer because the prognosis varies: some affected individuals respond well to normal treatment while others may require stronger treatments. The age at which the condition begins and the prognosis are affected by the specific genetic factors involved in the condition. Frequency Acute myeloid leukemia occurs in approximately 3.5 per 100,000 individuals each year. Forty to 50 percent of people with acute myeloid leukemia have CN-AML. Causes CN-AML is classified as "cytogenetically normal" based on the type of genetic changes involved in its development. Cytogenetically normal refers to the fact that this form of acute myeloid leukemia is not associated with large chromosomal abnormalities. About half of people with acute myeloid leukemia have this form of the condition; the other half have genetic changes that alter large regions of certain chromosomes. These changes can be identified by a test known as cytogenetic analysis. CN-AML is associated with smaller genetic changes that cannot be seen by cytogenetic analysis. Mutations in a large number of genes have been found in people with CN-AML; the most commonly affected genes are NPM1 , FLT3 , DNMT3A , CEBPA , IDH1 , and IDH2 . The proteins produced from these genes have different functions in the cell. Most are involved in regulating processes such as the growth and division (proliferation), maturation (differentiation), or survival of cells.  For example, the protein produced from the FLT3 gene stimulates the proliferation and survival of cells. The proteins produced from the CEBPA and DNMT3A genes regulate gene activity and help to control when cells divide and how they mature. The NPM1 gene provides instructions for a protein that is likely involved in the regulation of cell growth and division. Mutations in any of these genes can disrupt one or more of these processes in hematopoietic stem cells and lead to overproduction of abnormal, immature white blood cells , which is characteristic of CN-AML. Although the proteins produced from two other genes involved in CN-AML, IDH1 and IDH2 , are not normally involved in proliferation, differentiation, or survival of cells, mutations in these genes lead to the production of proteins with a new function. These changes result in impaired differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells, which leads to CN-AML. CN-AML is a complex condition influenced by several genetic and environmental factors. Typically, mutations in more than one gene are involved. For example, people with an NPM1 gene mutation frequently also have a mutation in the FLT3 gene, both of which are likely involved in the cancer's development. In addition, environmental factors such as smoking or exposure to radiation increase an individual's risk of developing acute myeloid leukemia. Learn more about the genes associated with Cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia CEBPA DNMT3A FLT3 IDH1 IDH2 NPM1 NRAS RUNX1 WT1 Additional Information from NCBI Gene: KMT2A Inheritance CN-AML is not usually inherited but arises from genetic changes in the body's cells that occur after conception. Rarely, an inherited mutation in the CEBPA gene causes acute myeloid leukemia. In these cases, the condition follows an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance , which means that one copy of the altered CEBPA gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. These cases of CN-AML are referred to as familial acute myeloid leukemia with mutated CEBPA . Other Names for This Condition Acute myelogenous leukemia with normal karyotype CN-AML NK-AML Normal karyotype acute myeloid leukemia Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Acute myeloid leukemia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM LEUKEMIA, ACUTE MYELOID; AML Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Dohner H. Implication of the molecular characterization of acute myeloid
leukemia. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2007:412-9. doi:
10.1182/asheducation-2007.1.412. Citation on PubMed Marcucci G, Haferlach T, Dohner H. Molecular genetics of adult acute myeloid
leukemia: prognostic and therapeutic implications. J Clin Oncol. 2011 Feb
10;29(5):475-86. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.30.2554. Epub 2011 Jan 10. Erratum In: J
Clin Oncol. 2011 May 1;29(13):1798. Citation on PubMed Mawad R, Estey EH. Acute myeloid leukemia with normal cytogenetics. Curr Oncol
Rep. 2012 Oct;14(5):359-68. doi: 10.1007/s11912-012-0252-x. Citation on PubMed Sanders MA, Valk PJ. The evolving molecular genetic landscape in acute myeloid
leukaemia. Curr Opin Hematol. 2013 Mar;20(2):79-85. doi:
10.1097/MOH.0b013e32835d821c. Citation on PubMed Welch JS, Ley TJ, Link DC, Miller CA, Larson DE, Koboldt DC, Wartman LD,
Lamprecht TL, Liu F, Xia J, Kandoth C, Fulton RS, McLellan MD, Dooling DJ, Wallis
JW, Chen K, Harris CC, Schmidt HK, Kalicki-Veizer JM, Lu C, Zhang Q, Lin L,
O'Laughlin MD, McMichael JF, Delehaunty KD, Fulton LA, Magrini VJ, McGrath SD,
Demeter RT, Vickery TL, Hundal J, Cook LL, Swift GW, Reed JP, Alldredge PA, Wylie
TN, Walker JR, Watson MA, Heath SE, Shannon WD, Varghese N, Nagarajan R, Payton
JE, Baty JD, Kulkarni S, Klco JM, Tomasson MH, Westervelt P, Walter MJ, Graubert
TA, DiPersio JF, Ding L, Mardis ER, Wilson RK. The origin and evolution of
mutations in acute myeloid leukemia. Cell. 2012 Jul 20;150(2):264-78. doi:
10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.023. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Acute Myeloid Leukemia Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2021