Glycogen storage disease type VI: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Glycogen storage disease type VI URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/glycogen-storage-disease-type-vi/ Glycogen storage disease type VI To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Glycogen storage disease type VI (also known as GSDVI or Hers disease) is an inherited disorder caused by an inability to break down a complex sugar called glycogen in liver cells. A lack of glycogen breakdown interferes with the normal function of the liver . The signs and symptoms of GSDVI typically begin in infancy to early childhood. The first sign is usually an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly). During prolonged periods without food (fasting), affected individuals may have low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) or elevated levels of ketones in the blood (ketosis). Ketones are molecules produced during the breakdown of fats, which occurs when stored sugars are unavailable. Children with GSDVI tend to grow slower than their peers, but they often achieve normal height as adults. Some affected children also have mild delays in the development of motor skills, such as sitting, standing, or walking. The signs and symptoms of GSDVI tend to improve with age; most adults with this condition do not have any related health problems. Frequency The exact prevalence of GSDVI is unknown. At least 11 cases have been reported in the medical literature, although this condition is likely to be underdiagnosed because it can be difficult to detect in children with mild symptoms or adults with no symptoms. GSDVI is more common in the Old Older Mennonite population, with an estimated incidence of 1 in 1,000 individuals. Causes Mutations in the PYGL gene cause GSDVI. The PYGL gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called liver glycogen phosphorylase. This enzyme is found only in liver cells, where it breaks down glycogen into a type of sugar called glucose-1-phosphate. Additional steps convert glucose-1-phosphate into glucose, a simple sugar that is the main energy source for most cells in the body. PYGL gene mutations prevent liver glycogen phosphorylase from breaking down glycogen effectively. Because liver cells cannot break down glycogen into glucose, individuals with GSDVI can have hypoglycemia and may use fats for energy, resulting in ketosis. Glycogen accumulates within liver cells, causing these cells to become enlarged and dysfunctional. Learn more about the gene associated with Glycogen storage disease type VI PYGL Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition GSD type VI GSD VI GSD6 Hepatic glycogen phosphorylase deficiency Hers disease Liver phosphorylase deficiency syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Glycogen storage disease, type VI Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Glycogen storage disease due to liver glycogen phosphorylase deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE VI; GSD6 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Beauchamp NJ, Taybert J, Champion MP, Layet V, Heinz-Erian P, Dalton A, Tanner
MS, Pronicka E, Sharrard MJ. High frequency of missense mutations in glycogen
storage disease type VI. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2007 Oct;30(5):722-34. doi:
10.1007/s10545-007-0499-9. Epub 2007 Aug 21. Citation on PubMed Burwinkel B, Bakker HD, Herschkovitz E, Moses SW, Shin YS, Kilimann MW.
Mutations in the liver glycogen phosphorylase gene (PYGL) underlying glycogenosis
type VI. Am J Hum Genet. 1998 Apr;62(4):785-91. doi: 10.1086/301790. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Chang S, Rosenberg MJ, Morton H, Francomano CA, Biesecker LG. Identification
of a mutation in liver glycogen phosphorylase in glycogen storage disease type
VI. Hum Mol Genet. 1998 May;7(5):865-70. doi: 10.1093/hmg/7.5.865. Citation on PubMed Labrador E, Weinstein DA. Glycogen Storage Disease Type VI. 2009 Apr 23
[updated 2019 Nov 27]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE,
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University
of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK5941/ Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Carbohydrate Metabolism Disorders Genetic Disorders Hypoglycemia Liver Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Enlarged liver Genetics Related Medical Tests Ketones in Blood Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated January 1, 2018