Weissenbacher-Zweymüller syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Weissenbacher-Zweymüller syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/weissenbacher-zweymuller-syndrome/ Weissenbacher-Zweymüller syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Weissenbacher-Zweymüller syndrome is a condition that affects bone growth. It is characterized by skeletal abnormalities, hearing loss, and distinctive facial features. The features of this condition significantly overlap those of two similar conditions, otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia (OSMED) and Stickler syndrome type III. All of these conditions are caused by mutations in the same gene, and in some cases, it can be difficult to tell them apart. Some researchers believe they represent a single disorder with a range of signs and symptoms. Infants born with Weissenbacher-Zweymüller syndrome are smaller than average because the bones in their arms and legs are unusually short. The thigh and upper arm bones are wider than usual at the ends (described as dumbbell-shaped), and the bones of the spine ( vertebrae ) may also be abnormally shaped. High-frequency hearing loss occurs in some cases. Distinctive facial features include wide-set protruding eyes, a small and upturned nose with a flat bridge , and a small lower jaw . Some affected infants are born with an opening in the roof of the mouth (a cleft palate ). Most people with Weissenbacher-Zweymüller syndrome experience significant "catch-up" growth in the bones of the arms and legs during childhood. As a result, adults with this condition are not unusually short. However, affected adults still have other signs and symptoms of Weissenbacher-Zweymüller syndrome, including distinctive facial features and hearing loss. Frequency Weissenbacher-Zweymüller syndrome is very rare; only a few affected families worldwide have been described in the medical literature. Causes Weissenbacher-Zweymüller syndrome is caused by mutations in the COL11A2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making one component of type XI collagen, which is a complex molecule that gives structure and strength to the connective tissues that support the body's joints and organs. Type XI collagen is found in cartilage, a tough but flexible tissue that makes up much of the skeleton during early development. Most cartilage is later converted to bone, except for the cartilage that continues to cover and protect the ends of bones and is present in the nose and external ears. Type XI collagen is also part of the inner ear and the nucleus pulposus, which is the center portion of the discs between vertebrae . At least one mutation in the COL11A2 gene can cause Weissenbacher-Zweymüller syndrome. This mutation disrupts the assembly of type XI collagen molecules. The defective collagen weakens connective tissues in many parts of the body, including the long bones, spine, and inner ears, which impairs bone development and underlies the other signs and symptoms of this condition. It is not well understood why "catch-up" bone growth occurs in childhood. Learn more about the gene associated with Weissenbacher-Zweymüller syndrome COL11A2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Most cases of this condition result from a new (de novo) mutation in the gene that occurs during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) or in early embryonic development. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Other Names for This Condition Heterozygous OSMED Heterozygous otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia Otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia, autosomal dominant Pierre Robin syndrome with fetal chondrodysplasia WZS Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia, autosomal dominant Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM OTOSPONDYLOMEGAEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT; OSMEDA Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Chemke J, Carmi R, Galil A, Bar-Ziv Y, Ben-Ytzhak I, Zurkowski L.
Weissenbacher-Zweymuller syndrome: a distinct autosomal recessive skeletal
dysplasia. Am J Med Genet. 1992 Aug 1;43(6):989-95. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320430616. Citation on PubMed Galil A, Carmi R, Goldstein E, Porter B, Bar Ziv J, Chemke J.
Weissenbacher-Zweymuller syndrome: long-term follow-up of growth and psychomotor
development. Dev Med Child Neurol. 1991 Dec;33(12):1104-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1469-8749.1991.tb14834.x. Citation on PubMed Harel T, Rabinowitz R, Hendler N, Galil A, Flusser H, Chemke J, Gradstein L,
Lifshitz T, Ofir R, Elbedour K, Birk OS. COL11A2 mutation associated with
autosomal recessive Weissenbacher-Zweymuller syndrome: molecular and clinical
overlap with otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia (OSMED). Am J Med Genet A. 2005
Jan 1;132A(1):33-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30371. Citation on PubMed Pihlajamaa T, Prockop DJ, Faber J, Winterpacht A, Zabel B, Giedion A,
Wiesbauer P, Spranger J, Ala-Kokko L. Heterozygous glycine substitution in the
COL11A2 gene in the original patient with the Weissenbacher-Zweymuller syndrome
demonstrates its identity with heterozygous OSMED (nonocular Stickler syndrome).
Am J Med Genet. 1998 Nov 2;80(2):115-20. doi:
10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(19981102)80:23.0.co;2-o. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Bone Diseases Connective Tissue Disorders Genetic Disorders Hearing Disorders and Deafness MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated May 1, 2016