Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/atypical-hemolytic-uremic-syndrome/ Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome is a disease that primarily affects kidney function. This condition, which can occur at any age, causes abnormal blood clots (thrombi) to form in small blood vessels in the kidneys. These clots can cause serious medical problems if they restrict or block blood flow. Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome is characterized by three major features related to abnormal clotting: hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and kidney failure. Hemolytic anemia occurs when red blood cells break down (undergo hemolysis) prematurely. In atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome, red blood cells can break apart as they squeeze past clots within small blood vessels. Anemia results if these cells are destroyed faster than the body can replace them. Anemia can lead to unusually pale skin (pallor), yellowing of the eyes and skin (jaundice), fatigue, shortness of breath, and a rapid heart rate. Thrombocytopenia is a reduced level of circulating platelets, which are cells that normally assist with blood clotting. In people with atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome, fewer platelets are available in the bloodstream because a large number of platelets are used to make abnormal clots. Thrombocytopenia can cause easy bruising and abnormal bleeding. As a result of clot formation in small blood vessels, people with atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome experience kidney damage and acute kidney failure that lead to end-stage renal disease (ESRD) in about half of all cases. These life-threatening complications prevent the kidneys from filtering fluids and waste products from the body effectively. Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome should be distinguished from a more common condition called typical hemolytic-uremic syndrome. The two disorders have different causes and different signs and symptoms. Unlike the atypical form, the typical form is caused by infection with certain strains of Escherichia coli bacteria that produce toxic substances called Shiga-like toxins. The typical form is characterized by severe diarrhea and most often affects children younger than 10. The typical form is less likely than the atypical form to involve recurrent attacks of kidney damage that lead to ESRD. Frequency The incidence of atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome is estimated to be 1 in 500,000 people per year in the United States. The atypical form is probably about 10 times less common than the typical form. Causes Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome often results from a combination of environmental and genetic factors. Mutations in at least seven genes appear to increase the risk of developing the disorder. Mutations in a gene called CFH are most common; they have been found in about 30 percent of all cases of atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome. Mutations in the other genes have each been identified in a smaller percentage of cases. The genes associated with atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome provide instructions for making proteins involved in a part of the body's immune response known as the complement system. This system is a group of proteins that work together to destroy foreign invaders (such as bacteria and viruses), trigger inflammation, and remove debris from cells and tissues. The complement system must be carefully regulated so it targets only unwanted materials and does not attack the body's healthy cells. The regulatory proteins associated with atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome protect healthy cells by preventing activation of the complement system when it is not needed. Mutations in the genes associated with atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome lead to uncontrolled activation of the complement system. The overactive system attacks cells that line blood vessels in the kidneys, causing inflammation and the formation of abnormal clots. These abnormalities lead to kidney damage and, in many cases, kidney failure and ESRD. Although gene mutations increase the risk of atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome, studies suggest that they are often not sufficient to cause the disease. In people with certain genetic changes, the signs and symptoms of the disorder may be triggered by factors including certain medications (such as anticancer drugs), chronic diseases, viral or bacterial infections, cancers, organ transplantation, or pregnancy. Some people with atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome do not have any known genetic changes or environmental triggers for the disease. In these cases, the disorder is described as idiopathic. Learn more about the genes associated with Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome C3 CFH CFHR5 CFI Additional Information from NCBI Gene: CD46 CFB THBD Inheritance Most cases of atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome are sporadic, which means that they occur in people with no apparent history of the disorder in their family. Less than 20 percent of all cases have been reported to run in families. When the disorder is familial, it can have an autosomal dominant or an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. Autosomal dominant inheritance means one copy of an altered gene in each cell is sufficient to increase the risk of the disorder. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent . However, most people with the autosomal dominant form of atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome have no history of the disorder in their family. Because not everyone who inherits a gene mutation will develop the signs and symptoms of the disease, an affected individual may have unaffected relatives who carry a copy of the mutation. Autosomal recessive inheritance means both copies of a gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition AHUS Non-Shiga-like toxin-associated HUS Non-Stx-HUS Nonenteropathic HUS Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome Genetic Testing Registry: Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome with B factor anomaly Genetic Testing Registry: Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome with C3 anomaly Genetic Testing Registry: Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome with I factor anomaly Genetic Testing Registry: Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome with MCP/CD46 anomaly Genetic Testing Registry: Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome with thrombomodulin anomaly Genetic Testing Registry: Hemolytic uremic syndrome, atypical, susceptibility to, 1 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM HEMOLYTIC UREMIC SYNDROME, ATYPICAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1; AHUS1 HEMOLYTIC UREMIC SYNDROME, ATYPICAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 2; AHUS2 HEMOLYTIC UREMIC SYNDROME, ATYPICAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 3; AHUS3 HEMOLYTIC UREMIC SYNDROME, ATYPICAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 4; AHUS4 HEMOLYTIC UREMIC SYNDROME, ATYPICAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 5; AHUS5 HEMOLYTIC UREMIC SYNDROME, ATYPICAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 6; AHUS6 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Caprioli J, Noris M, Brioschi S, Pianetti G, Castelletti F, Bettinaglio P,
Mele C, Bresin E, Cassis L, Gamba S, Porrati F, Bucchioni S, Monteferrante G,
Fang CJ, Liszewski MK, Kavanagh D, Atkinson JP, Remuzzi G; International Registry
of Recurrent and Familial HUS/TTP. Genetics of HUS: the impact of MCP, CFH, and
IF mutations on clinical presentation, response to treatment, and outcome. Blood.
2006 Aug 15;108(4):1267-79. doi: 10.1182/blood-2005-10-007252. Epub 2006 Apr 18. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Hirt-Minkowski P, Dickenmann M, Schifferli JA. Atypical hemolytic uremic
syndrome: update on the complement system and what is new. Nephron Clin Pract.
2010;114(4):c219-35. doi: 10.1159/000276545. Epub 2010 Jan 14. Citation on PubMed Jokiranta TS, Zipfel PF, Fremeaux-Bacchi V, Taylor CM, Goodship TJ, Noris M.
Where next with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome? Mol Immunol. 2007
Sep;44(16):3889-900. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2007.06.003. Citation on PubMed Loirat C, Noris M, Fremeaux-Bacchi V. Complement and the atypical hemolytic
uremic syndrome in children. Pediatr Nephrol. 2008 Nov;23(11):1957-72. doi:
10.1007/s00467-008-0872-4. Epub 2008 Jul 2. Citation on PubMed Noris M, Bresin E, Mele C, Remuzzi G. Genetic Atypical Hemolytic-Uremic
Syndrome. 2007 Nov 16 [updated 2021 Sep 23]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM,
Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1367/ Citation on PubMed Noris M, Remuzzi G. Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2009 Oct
22;361(17):1676-87. doi: 10.1056/NEJMra0902814. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Noris M, Remuzzi G. Hemolytic uremic syndrome. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2005
Apr;16(4):1035-50. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2004100861. Epub 2005 Feb 23. No abstract
available. Citation on PubMed Sellier-Leclerc AL, Fremeaux-Bacchi V, Dragon-Durey MA, Macher MA, Niaudet P,
Guest G, Boudailliez B, Bouissou F, Deschenes G, Gie S, Tsimaratos M, Fischbach
M, Morin D, Nivet H, Alberti C, Loirat C; French Society of Pediatric Nephrology.
Differential impact of complement mutations on clinical characteristics in
atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2007 Aug;18(8):2392-400.
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2006080811. Epub 2007 Jun 28. Citation on PubMed Sullivan M, Erlic Z, Hoffmann MM, Arbeiter K, Patzer L, Budde K, Hoppe B,
Zeier M, Lhotta K, Rybicki LA, Bock A, Berisha G, Neumann HP. Epidemiological
approach to identifying genetic predispositions for atypical hemolytic uremic
syndrome. Ann Hum Genet. 2010 Jan;74(1):17-26. doi:
10.1111/j.1469-1809.2009.00554.x. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Kidney Diseases Platelet Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Hemolytic anemia Hemolytic-uremic syndrome Thrombocytopenia Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 1, 2010