Supravalvular aortic stenosis: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Supravalvular aortic stenosis URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/supravalvular-aortic-stenosis/ Supravalvular aortic stenosis To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Supravalvular aortic stenosis (SVAS) is a heart defect that develops before birth. This defect is a narrowing (stenosis) of the large blood vessel that carries blood from the heart to the rest of the body (the aorta). The condition is described as supravalvular because the section of the aorta that is narrowed is located just above the valve that connects the aorta with the heart (the aortic valve). Some people with SVAS also have defects in other blood vessels, most commonly stenosis of the artery from the heart to the lungs ( the pulmonary artery ). An abnormal heart sound during a heartbeat (heart murmur) can often be heard during a chest exam. If SVAS is not treated, the aortic narrowing can lead to shortness of breath, chest pain, and ultimately heart failure. The severity of SVAS varies considerably, even among family members. Some affected individuals die in infancy, while others never experience symptoms of the disorder. Frequency SVAS occurs in 1 in 20,000 newborns worldwide. Causes Mutations in the ELN gene cause SVAS. The ELN gene provides instructions for making a protein called tropoelastin. Multiple copies of the tropoelastin protein attach to one another and are processed to form a mature protein called elastin. Elastin is the major component of elastic fibers, which are slender bundles of proteins that provide strength and flexibility to connective tissue (tissue that supports the body's joints and organs). Elastic fibers are found in the intricate lattice that forms in the spaces between cells (the extracellular matrix), where they give structural support to organs and tissues such as the heart , skin, lungs, ligaments, and blood vessels . Elastic fibers make up approximately 50 percent of the aorta , the rest being primarily muscle cells called vascular smooth muscle cells that line the aorta. Together, elastic fibers and vascular smooth muscle cells provide flexibility and resilience to the aorta. Most of the ELN gene mutations that cause SVAS lead to a decrease in the production of tropoelastin. A shortage of tropoelastin reduces the amount of mature elastin protein that is processed and available for forming elastic fibers. As a result, elastic fibers that make up the aorta are thinner than normal. To compensate, the smooth muscle cells that line the aorta increase in number, making the aorta thicker and narrower than usual. A thickened aorta is less flexible and resilient to the stress of constant blood flow and pumping of the heart. Over time, the wall of the aorta can become damaged. Aortic narrowing causes the heart to work harder to pump blood through the aorta, resulting in the signs and symptoms of SVAS. Learn more about the gene associated with Supravalvular aortic stenosis ELN Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. However, some people who inherit the altered gene never develop features of SVAS. (This situation is known as reduced penetrance.) In some cases, a person inherits the mutation from one parent who has the mutation.  Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Other Names for This Condition Aortic stenosis, supravalvular Stenosis, aortic supravalvular Stenosis, supravalvular aortic Supravalvar aortic stenosis Supravalvular stenosis, aortic SVAS Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Supravalvar aortic stenosis Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Supravalvular aortic stenosis Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS; SVAS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Metcalfe K, Rucka AK, Smoot L, Hofstadler G, Tuzler G, McKeown P, Siu V, Rauch
A, Dean J, Dennis N, Ellis I, Reardon W, Cytrynbaum C, Osborne L, Yates JR, Read
AP, Donnai D, Tassabehji M. Elastin: mutational spectrum in supravalvular aortic
stenosis. Eur J Hum Genet. 2000 Dec;8(12):955-63. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200564. Citation on PubMed Micale L, Turturo MG, Fusco C, Augello B, Jurado LA, Izzi C, Digilio MC,
Milani D, Lapi E, Zelante L, Merla G. Identification and characterization of
seven novel mutations of elastin gene in a cohort of patients affected by
supravalvular aortic stenosis. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010 Mar;18(3):317-23. doi:
10.1038/ejhg.2009.181. Epub 2009 Oct 21. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Rodriguez-Revenga L, Badenas C, Carrio A, Mila M. Elastin mutation screening
in a group of patients affected by vascular abnormalities. Pediatr Cardiol. 2005
Nov-Dec;26(6):827-31. doi: 10.1007/s00246-005-0885-8. Citation on PubMed Tassabehji M, Urban Z. Congenital heart disease: Molecular diagnostics of
supravalvular aortic stenosis. Methods Mol Med. 2006;126:129-56. doi:
10.1385/1-59745-088-X:129. Citation on PubMed Urban Z, Riazi S, Seidl TL, Katahira J, Smoot LB, Chitayat D, Boyd CD, Hinek
A. Connection between elastin haploinsufficiency and increased cell proliferation
in patients with supravalvular aortic stenosis and Williams-Beuren syndrome. Am J
Hum Genet. 2002 Jul;71(1):30-44. doi: 10.1086/341035. Epub 2002 May 6. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Congenital Heart Defects Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Aortic stenosis Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated May 1, 2012