Leydig cell hypoplasia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Leydig cell hypoplasia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/leydig-cell-hypoplasia/ Leydig cell hypoplasia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Leydig cell hypoplasia is a condition that affects male sexual development. It is characterized by underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of Leydig cells in the testes. Leydig cells secrete male sex hormones (androgens) that are important for normal male sexual development before birth and during puberty. In Leydig cell hypoplasia, affected individuals with a typical male chromosomal pattern ( 46,XY ) may have a range of genital abnormalities. Affected males may have a small penis (micropenis), the opening of the urethra on the underside of the penis (hypospadias), or a scrotum divided into two lobes (bifid scrotum). Because of these abnormalities, the external genitalia may not look clearly male or clearly female. In more severe cases of Leydig cell hypoplasia, people with a typical male chromosomal pattern (46,XY) have female external genitalia. They have small testes that are undescended, which means they are abnormally located in the pelvis, abdomen, or groin. People with this form of the disorder do not develop secondary sex characteristics, such as increased body hair, at puberty. Some researchers refer to this form of Leydig cell hypoplasia as type 1 and designate less severe cases as type 2. Frequency Leydig cell hypoplasia is a rare disorder; its prevalence is unknown. Causes Mutations in the LHCGR gene cause Leydig cell hypoplasia. The LHCGR gene provides instructions for making a protein called the luteinizing hormone/chorionic gonadotropin receptor. Receptor proteins have specific sites into which certain other proteins, called ligands, fit like keys into locks. Together, ligands and their receptors trigger signals that affect cell development and function. The protein produced from the LHCGR gene acts as a receptor for two ligands: luteinizing hormone and a similar hormone called chorionic gonadotropin. The receptor allows the body to respond appropriately to these hormones. In males, chorionic gonadotropin stimulates the development of cells in the testes called Leydig cells, and luteinizing hormone triggers these cells to produce androgens. Androgens, including testosterone, are the hormones that control male sexual development and reproduction. In females, luteinizing hormone triggers the release of egg cells from the ovary (ovulation). Chorionic gonadotropin is produced during pregnancy and helps maintain conditions necessary for the pregnancy to continue. The LHCGR gene mutations that cause Leydig cell hypoplasia disrupt luteinizing hormone/chorionic gonadotropin receptor function, impeding the body's ability to react to these hormones. In males, the mutations result in poorly developed or absent Leydig cells and impaired production of testosterone. A lack of testosterone interferes with the development of male reproductive organs before birth and the changes that appear at puberty. Mutations that prevent the production of any functional receptor protein cause the more severe features of Leydig cell hypoplasia, and mutations that allow some receptor protein function cause milder signs and symptoms. Learn more about the gene associated with Leydig cell hypoplasia LHCGR Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Only people who have mutations in both copies of the LHCGR gene and are genetically male (with one X and one Y chromosome in each cell) have the characteristic signs of Leydig cell hypoplasia. Although people who are genetically female (with two X chromosomes in each cell) may inherit mutations in both copies of the LHCGR gene, they do not have Leydig cell hypoplasia because they do not have Leydig cells. They have normal female genitalia and normal breast and pubic hair development, but they may begin menstruation later than usual (after age 16) and have irregular menstrual periods. LHCGR gene mutations in females also prevent ovulation, leading to inability to have children (infertility). Other Names for This Condition 46,XY disorder of sex development due to LH defects LCH Leydig cell agenesis LH resistance due to LH receptor deactivation Male hypergonadotropic hypogonadism due to LHCGR defect Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Leydig cell agenesis Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Leydig cell hypoplasia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM LEYDIG CELL HYPOPLASIA, TYPE I Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Kossack N, Simoni M, Richter-Unruh A, Themmen AP, Gromoll J. Mutations in a
novel, cryptic exon of the luteinizing hormone/chorionic gonadotropin receptor
gene cause male pseudohermaphroditism. PLoS Med. 2008 Apr 22;5(4):e88. doi:
10.1371/journal.pmed.0050088. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Qiao J, Han B, Liu BL, Chen X, Ru Y, Cheng KX, Chen FG, Zhao SX, Liang J, Lu
YL, Tang JF, Wu YX, Wu WL, Chen JL, Chen MD, Song HD. A splice site mutation
combined with a novel missense mutation of LHCGR cause male
pseudohermaphroditism. Hum Mutat. 2009 Sep;30(9):E855-65. doi:
10.1002/humu.21072. Citation on PubMed Themmen AP, Verhoef-Post M. LH receptor defects. Semin Reprod Med. 2002
Aug;20(3):199-204. doi: 10.1055/s-2002-35384. Citation on PubMed Wu SM, Chan WY. Male pseudohermaphroditism due to inactivating luteinizing
hormone receptor mutations. Arch Med Res. 1999 Nov-Dec;30(6):495-500. doi:
10.1016/s0188-4409(99)00074-0. Citation on PubMed Wu SM, Leschek EW, Rennert OM, Chan WY. Luteinizing hormone receptor mutations
in disorders of sexual development and cancer. Front Biosci. 2000 Mar
1;5:D343-52. doi: 10.2741/wu. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Endocrine Diseases Genetic Disorders Infertility MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Ambiguous genitalia Differences of sex development Genetics Hypospadias Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated April 1, 2010