UV-sensitive syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → UV-sensitive syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/uv-sensitive-syndrome/ UV-sensitive syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description UV-sensitive syndrome is a condition that is characterized by sensitivity to the ultraviolet (UV) rays in sunlight. Even a small amount of sun exposure can cause a sunburn in affected individuals. In addition, these individuals can have freckles, dryness, or changes in coloring (pigmentation) on sun-exposed areas of skin after repeated exposure. Some people with UV-sensitive syndrome have small clusters of enlarged blood vessels just under the skin (telangiectasia), usually on the cheeks and nose. Although UV exposure can cause skin cancers, people with UV-sensitive syndrome do not have an increased risk of developing these forms of cancer compared with the general population. Frequency UV-sensitive syndrome appears to be a rare condition; only a small number of affected individuals have been reported in the scientific literature. However, this condition may be underdiagnosed. Causes UV-sensitive syndrome can result from mutations in the ERCC6 gene (also known as the CSB gene), the ERCC8 gene (also known as the CSA gene), or the UVSSA gene. These genes provide instructions for making proteins that are involved in repairing damaged DNA. DNA can be damaged by UV rays from the sun and by toxic chemicals, radiation, and unstable molecules called free radicals. Cells are usually able to fix DNA damage before it causes problems. If left uncorrected, DNA damage accumulates, which causes cells to malfunction and can lead to cell death. Cells have several mechanisms to correct DNA damage. The CSB, CSA, and UVSSA proteins are involved in one mechanism that repairs damaged DNA within active genes (those genes undergoing gene transcription, the first step in protein production). When DNA in active genes is damaged, the enzyme that carries out gene transcription (RNA polymerase) gets stuck, and the process stalls. Researchers think that the CSB, CSA, and UVSSA proteins help remove RNA polymerase from the damaged site, so the DNA can be repaired. Mutations in the ERCC6 , ERCC8 , or UVSSA genes lead to the production of an abnormal protein or the loss of the protein. If any of these proteins is not functioning normally, skin cells cannot repair DNA damage caused by UV rays, and transcription of damaged genes is blocked. However, it is unclear exactly how abnormalities in these proteins cause the signs and symptoms of UV-sensitive syndrome. Learn more about the genes associated with UV-sensitive syndrome ERCC6 ERCC8 UVSSA Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Ultraviolet sensitive syndrome UVSS Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: UV-sensitive syndrome 1 Genetic Testing Registry: UV-sensitive syndrome 2 Genetic Testing Registry: UV-sensitive syndrome 3 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center UV-sensitive syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM UV-SENSITIVE SYNDROME 1; UVSS1 UV-SENSITIVE SYNDROME 2; UVSS2 UV-SENSITIVE SYNDROME 3; UVSS3 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Horibata K, Iwamoto Y, Kuraoka I, Jaspers NG, Kurimasa A, Oshimura M,
Ichihashi M, Tanaka K. Complete absence of Cockayne syndrome group B gene product
gives rise to UV-sensitive syndrome but not Cockayne syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2004 Oct 26;101(43):15410-5. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0404587101. Epub 2004 Oct
14. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Itoh T, Fujiwara Y, Ono T, Yamaizumi M. UVs syndrome, a new general category
of photosensitive disorder with defective DNA repair, is distinct from xeroderma
pigmentosum variant and rodent complementation group I. Am J Hum Genet. 1995
Jun;56(6):1267-76. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Itoh T, Yamaizumi M, Ichihashi M, Hiro-Oka M, Matsui T, Matsuno M, Ono T.
Clinical characteristics of three patients with UVs syndrome, a photosensitive
disorder with defective DNA repair. Br J Dermatol. 1996 Jun;134(6):1147-50. Citation on PubMed Nardo T, Oneda R, Spivak G, Vaz B, Mortier L, Thomas P, Orioli D, Laugel V,
Stary A, Hanawalt PC, Sarasin A, Stefanini M. A UV-sensitive syndrome patient
with a specific CSA mutation reveals separable roles for CSA in response to UV
and oxidative DNA damage. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Apr 14;106(15):6209-14.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0902113106. Epub 2009 Mar 27. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Spivak G, Itoh T, Matsunaga T, Nikaido O, Hanawalt P, Yamaizumi M.
Ultraviolet-sensitive syndrome cells are defective in transcription-coupled
repair of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers. DNA Repair (Amst). 2002 Aug
6;1(8):629-43. doi: 10.1016/s1568-7864(02)00056-3. Citation on PubMed Zhang X, Horibata K, Saijo M, Ishigami C, Ukai A, Kanno S, Tahara H, Neilan
EG, Honma M, Nohmi T, Yasui A, Tanaka K. Mutations in UVSSA cause UV-sensitive
syndrome and destabilize ERCC6 in transcription-coupled DNA repair. Nat Genet.
2012 May;44(5):593-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.2228. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Skin Conditions Sun Exposure MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated July 1, 2012