Narcolepsy: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Narcolepsy URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/narcolepsy/ Narcolepsy To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Narcolepsy is a chronic sleep disorder that disrupts the normal sleep-wake cycle. Although this condition can appear at any age, it most often begins in adolescence. Narcolepsy is characterized by excessive daytime sleepiness. Affected individuals feel tired during the day, and several times a day they may experience an overwhelming urge to sleep. "Sleep attacks" can occur at unusual times, such as during a meal or in the middle of a conversation. They last from a few seconds to a few minutes and often lead to a longer nap, after which affected individuals wake up feeling refreshed. Another common feature of narcolepsy is cataplexy, which is a sudden loss of muscle tone in response to strong emotion (such as laughing, surprise, or anger). These episodes of muscle weakness can cause an affected person to slump over or fall, which occasionally leads to injury. Episodes of cataplexy usually last just a few seconds, and they may occur from several times a day to a few times a year. Most people diagnosed with narcolepsy also have cataplexy. However, some do not, which has led researchers to distinguish two major forms of the condition: narcolepsy with cataplexy and narcolepsy without cataplexy. Narcolepsy also affects nighttime sleep. Most affected individuals have trouble sleeping for more than a few hours at night. They often experience vivid hallucinations while falling asleep (hypnogogic hallucinations) or while waking up (hypnopompic hallucinations). Affected individuals often have realistic and distressing dreams, and they may act out their dreams by moving excessively or talking in their sleep. Many people with narcolepsy also experience sleep paralysis, which is an inability to move or speak for a short period while falling asleep or awakening. The combination of hallucinations, vivid dreams, and sleep paralysis is often frightening and unpleasant for affected individuals. Some people with narcolepsy have all of the major features of the disorder, while others have only one or two. Most of the signs and symptoms persist throughout life, although episodes of cataplexy may become less frequent with age and treatment. Frequency Narcolepsy affects about 1 in 2,000 people in the United States and Western Europe. However, the disorder is likely underdiagnosed, particularly in people with mild symptoms. Worldwide, narcolepsy appears to be most common in Japan, where it affects an estimated 1 in 600 people. Causes Narcolepsy probably results from a combination of genetic and environmental factors, some of which have been identified, but many of which remain unknown. In most cases of narcolepsy with cataplexy, and in some cases without cataplexy, sleep abnormalities result from a loss of particular brain cells (neurons) in a part of the brain called the hypothalamus. These cells normally produce chemicals called hypocretins (also known as orexins), which have many important functions in the body. In particular, hypocretins regulate the daily sleep-wake cycle. It is unclear what triggers the death of hypocretin-producing neurons in people with narcolepsy, although evidence increasingly points to an abnormality of the immune system. Researchers have identified changes in several genes that influence the risk of developing narcolepsy. The most well-studied of these genes is HLA-DQB1 , which provides instructions for making part of a protein that plays an important role in the immune system. The HLA-DQB1 gene is part of a family of genes called the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) complex . The HLA complex helps the immune system distinguish the body's own proteins from proteins made by foreign invaders (such as viruses and bacteria). The HLA-DQB1 gene has many different normal variations, allowing each person's immune system to react to a wide range of foreign proteins. A variation of the HLA-DQB1 gene called HLA-DQB1*06:02 has been strongly associated with narcolepsy, particularly in people who also have cataplexy and a loss of hypocretins. Most people with narcolepsy have the HLA-DQB1*06:02 variation, and many also have specific versions of other, closely related HLA genes. It is unclear how these genetic changes influence the risk of developing the condition. Variations in several additional genes have also been associated with narcolepsy. Many of these genes are thought to play roles in immune system function. However, variations in these genes probably make only a small contribution to the overall risk of developing narcolepsy. Other genetic and environmental factors are also likely to influence a person's chances of developing this disorder. For example, studies suggest that bacterial or viral infections such as strep throat (streptococcus), colds, and influenza may be involved in triggering narcolepsy in people who are at risk. Learn more about the genes associated with Narcolepsy HLA-DQA1 HLA-DQB1 HLA-DRB1 Additional Information from NCBI Gene: CHKB CPT1B P2RY11 TNF TNFRSF1B TRA Inheritance Most cases of narcolepsy are sporadic, which means they occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. A small percentage of all cases have been reported to run in families; however, the condition does not have a clear pattern of inheritance. First-degree relatives (parents, siblings, and children) of people with narcolepsy with cataplexy have a 40 times greater risk of developing the condition compared with people in the general population. Other Names for This Condition Gelineau syndrome Narcoleptic syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Cataplexy and narcolepsy Genetic Testing Registry: Narcolepsy 1 Genetic Testing Registry: Narcolepsy 2, susceptibility to Genetic Testing Registry: Narcolepsy 3 Genetic Testing Registry: Narcolepsy 4, susceptibility to Genetic Testing Registry: Narcolepsy 5, susceptibility to Genetic Testing Registry: Narcolepsy 6, susceptibility to Genetic Testing Registry: Narcolepsy 7 Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM NARCOLEPSY 1; NRCLP1 NARCOLEPSY 2, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO; NRCLP2 NARCOLEPSY 3; NRCLP3 NARCOLEPSY 4, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO; NRCLP4 NARCOLEPSY 7; NRCLP7 NARCOLEPSY 6, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO; NRCLP6 NARCOLEPSY 5, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO; NRCLP5 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Cvetkovic-Lopes V, Bayer L, Dorsaz S, Maret S, Pradervand S, Dauvilliers Y,
Lecendreux M, Lammers GJ, Donjacour CE, Du Pasquier RA, Pfister C, Petit B, Hor
H, Muhlethaler M, Tafti M. Elevated Tribbles homolog 2-specific antibody levels
in narcolepsy patients. J Clin Invest. 2010 Mar;120(3):713-9. doi:
10.1172/JCI41366. Epub 2010 Feb 15. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Dauvilliers Y, Arnulf I, Mignot E. Narcolepsy with cataplexy. Lancet. 2007 Feb
10;369(9560):499-511. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60237-2. Citation on PubMed Dauvilliers Y, Montplaisir J, Cochen V, Desautels A, Einen M, Lin L, Kawashima
M, Bayard S, Monaca C, Tiberge M, Filipini D, Tripathy A, Nguyen BH, Kotagal S,
Mignot E. Post-H1N1 narcolepsy-cataplexy. Sleep. 2010 Nov;33(11):1428-30. doi:
10.1093/sleep/33.11.1428. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Hallmayer J, Faraco J, Lin L, Hesselson S, Winkelmann J, Kawashima M, Mayer G,
Plazzi G, Nevsimalova S, Bourgin P, Hong SC, Honda Y, Honda M, Hogl B, Longstreth
WT Jr, Montplaisir J, Kemlink D, Einen M, Chen J, Musone SL, Akana M, Miyagawa T,
Duan J, Desautels A, Erhardt C, Hesla PE, Poli F, Frauscher B, Jeong JH, Lee SP,
Ton TG, Kvale M, Kolesar L, Dobrovolna M, Nepom GT, Salomon D, Wichmann HE,
Rouleau GA, Gieger C, Levinson DF, Gejman PV, Meitinger T, Young T, Peppard P,
Tokunaga K, Kwok PY, Risch N, Mignot E. Narcolepsy is strongly associated with
the T-cell receptor alpha locus. Nat Genet. 2009 Jun;41(6):708-11. doi:
10.1038/ng.372. Epub 2009 May 3. Erratum In: Nat Genet. 2009 Jul;41(7):859. Hong,
Sheng Seung-Chul [corrected to Hong, Seung-Chul]. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Hohjoh H, Terada N, Kawashima M, Honda Y, Tokunaga K. Significant association
of the tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 (TNFR2) gene with human narcolepsy.
Tissue Antigens. 2000 Nov;56(5):446-8. doi: 10.1034/j.1399-0039.2000.560508.x. Citation on PubMed Hor H, Kutalik Z, Dauvilliers Y, Valsesia A, Lammers GJ, Donjacour CE, Iranzo
A, Santamaria J, Peraita Adrados R, Vicario JL, Overeem S, Arnulf I, Theodorou I,
Jennum P, Knudsen S, Bassetti C, Mathis J, Lecendreux M, Mayer G, Geisler P,
Beneto A, Petit B, Pfister C, Burki JV, Didelot G, Billiard M, Ercilla G,
Verduijn W, Claas FH, Vollenweider P, Waeber G, Waterworth DM, Mooser V, Heinzer
R, Beckmann JS, Bergmann S, Tafti M. Genome-wide association study identifies new
HLA class II haplotypes strongly protective against narcolepsy. Nat Genet. 2010
Sep;42(9):786-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.647. Epub 2010 Aug 15. Erratum In: Nat Genet.
2011 Apr;43(4):388. Vollenwider, Peter [corrected to Vollenweider, Peter]. Citation on PubMed Kornum BR, Kawashima M, Faraco J, Lin L, Rico TJ, Hesselson S, Axtell RC,
Kuipers H, Weiner K, Hamacher A, Kassack MU, Han F, Knudsen S, Li J, Dong X,
Winkelmann J, Plazzi G, Nevsimalova S, Hong SC, Honda Y, Honda M, Hogl B, Ton TG,
Montplaisir J, Bourgin P, Kemlink D, Huang YS, Warby S, Einen M, Eshragh JL,
Miyagawa T, Desautels A, Ruppert E, Hesla PE, Poli F, Pizza F, Frauscher B, Jeong
JH, Lee SP, Strohl KP, Longstreth WT Jr, Kvale M, Dobrovolna M, Ohayon MM, Nepom
GT, Wichmann HE, Rouleau GA, Gieger C, Levinson DF, Gejman PV, Meitinger T,
Peppard P, Young T, Jennum P, Steinman L, Tokunaga K, Kwok PY, Risch N, Hallmayer
J, Mignot E. Common variants in P2RY11 are associated with narcolepsy. Nat Genet.
2011 Jan;43(1):66-71. doi: 10.1038/ng.734. Epub 2010 Dec 19. Erratum In: Nat
Genet. 2011 Oct;43(10):1040. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Mieda M. The roles of orexins in sleep/wake regulation. Neurosci Res. 2017
May;118:56-65. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2017.03.015. Epub 2017 May 16. Citation on PubMed Mignot E, Lin L, Rogers W, Honda Y, Qiu X, Lin X, Okun M, Hohjoh H, Miki T,
Hsu S, Leffell M, Grumet F, Fernandez-Vina M, Honda M, Risch N. Complex HLA-DR
and -DQ interactions confer risk of narcolepsy-cataplexy in three ethnic groups.
Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Mar;68(3):686-99. doi: 10.1086/318799. Epub 2001 Feb 13. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Miyagawa T, Kawashima M, Nishida N, Ohashi J, Kimura R, Fujimoto A, Shimada M,
Morishita S, Shigeta T, Lin L, Hong SC, Faraco J, Shin YK, Jeong JH, Okazaki Y,
Tsuji S, Honda M, Honda Y, Mignot E, Tokunaga K. Variant between CPT1B and CHKB
associated with susceptibility to narcolepsy. Nat Genet. 2008 Nov;40(11):1324-8.
doi: 10.1038/ng.231. Epub 2008 Sep 28. Citation on PubMed Peyron C, Faraco J, Rogers W, Ripley B, Overeem S, Charnay Y, Nevsimalova S,
Aldrich M, Reynolds D, Albin R, Li R, Hungs M, Pedrazzoli M, Padigaru M,
Kucherlapati M, Fan J, Maki R, Lammers GJ, Bouras C, Kucherlapati R, Nishino S,
Mignot E. A mutation in a case of early onset narcolepsy and a generalized
absence of hypocretin peptides in human narcoleptic brains. Nat Med. 2000
Sep;6(9):991-7. doi: 10.1038/79690. Citation on PubMed Scammell TE. Narcolepsy. N Engl J Med. 2015 Dec 31;373(27):2654-62. doi:
10.1056/NEJMra1500587. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Sleep Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Narcolepsy Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 1, 2018