Small Intestine Cancer Treatment - NCI Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Español Menu Search Search About Cancer Cancer Types Research Grants & Training News & Events About NCI Home Cancer Types Small Intestine Cancer Patient Small Intestine Cancer Treatment (PDQ®)–Patient Version Print Email Small Intestine Cancer Patient Small Intestine Cancer Treatment Health Professional Research Small Intestine Cancer Treatment (PDQ®)–Patient Version On This Page General Information About Small  Intestine Cancer Stages of Small  Intestine Cancer Treatment Option Overview Treatment of Small Intestine Adenocarcinoma Treatment of Small  Intestine Leiomyosarcoma Treatment of Recurrent Small  Intestine Cancer To Learn More About Small Intestine Cancer About This PDQ Summary General Information About Small  Intestine Cancer Go to Health Professional Version Key Points Small  intestine cancer is a rare disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the small  intestine. There are  five types of small intestine cancer. Diet and health history can affect the risk of developing small  intestine cancer. Signs and symptoms of small  intestine cancer include unexplained weight loss and abdominal pain. Tests that examine the small intestine are used to diagnose and stage small  intestine cancer. Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Small  intestine cancer is a rare disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the small  intestine. The small intestine is part of the
		  body’s digestive system , which also includes the esophagus , stomach , and large
		  intestine .  The
		  digestive system removes and processes nutrients ( vitamins , minerals , carbohydrates , fats, proteins , and water) from foods and helps pass waste
		  material out of the body. The small intestine is a long tube that connects the stomach to the large intestine.   It folds many times to fit inside the abdomen . Enlarge The small intestine is a long tube-like organ that connects the stomach to the large intestine. The small intestine includes the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum. There are  five types of small intestine cancer. The types of cancer found in the small intestine are adenocarcinoma , sarcoma , neuroendocrine tumors , gastrointestinal stromal tumor , and lymphoma . This summary discusses adenocarcinoma and leiomyosarcoma (a type of  sarcoma). Adenocarcinoma starts in glandular cells in the lining of the small intestine and is the most common type of small intestine cancer . Most of these tumors occur in the part of the small intestine near the stomach. They may grow and block the intestine. Leiomyosarcoma starts in the smooth muscle cells of the small intestine. Most of these tumors occur in the part of the small intestine near the large intestine. For more information on small intestine cancer, see the following: Gastrointestinal Neuroendocrine Tumors Treatment Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors Treatment Diet and health history can affect the risk of developing small  intestine cancer. Anything that increases a person's chance of getting a disease is called 
         a risk factor .  Not every person with one or more of these risk factors will develop small intestine cancer, and it will develop in some people who don't have any known risk factors. Talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk.  Risk factors for small intestine cancer include the following: Eating a  high-fat diet . Having Crohn disease . Having celiac disease . Having familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Signs and symptoms of small  intestine cancer include unexplained weight loss and abdominal pain. These and other signs and symptoms may be caused by small  intestine cancer or by other conditions .  Check with your doctor if you have any of the  following: Pain or cramps in the middle of the abdomen. Weight loss with no known reason. A lump in the abdomen. Blood in the stool . Tests that examine the small intestine are used to diagnose and stage small  intestine cancer. Procedures
		  that make pictures of the small intestine and the area around it help diagnose small intestine cancer and show how far the cancer has spread. The process used
		  to find out if cancer cells have spread within and around the small intestine is
		  called staging . In order to plan treatment, it is important to know  the type of small intestine cancer and whether the tumor can be removed by surgery . Tests and procedures
		  to detect, diagnose, and stage small intestine cancer are usually done at the same
		  time. In addition to asking about your personal and family health history and doing a physical exam , your doctor may perform the following tests and procedures: Blood chemistry studies : A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by organs and tissues in the body. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease. Liver function tests : A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by the liver .  A higher than normal amount of a substance can  be a sign of liver disease that may be caused by small intestine cancer. Endoscopy :  A procedure to look at organs and tissues inside the body to check for abnormal areas. There are different types of endoscopy: Upper endoscopy : A procedure to look at the inside of the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum (first part of the small intestine, near the stomach). An endoscope is inserted  through the mouth and into the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum.  An endoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. It may also have a tool to remove tissue samples, which are checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. Capsule endoscopy : A procedure to look at the inside of the small intestine. A capsule that is about the size of a large pill and contains a light and a tiny wireless camera is swallowed by the patient. The capsule travels through the digestive tract , including the small intestine, and sends many pictures of the inside of the digestive tract to a recorder that is worn around the waist or over the shoulder. The pictures are sent from the recorder to a computer and viewed by the doctor who checks for signs of cancer. The capsule passes out of the body during a bowel movement . Double balloon endoscopy : A procedure to look at the inside of the small intestine. A special instrument made up of two tubes (one inside the other) is inserted through the mouth or rectum and into the small intestine. The inside  tube (an endoscope with a light and lens for viewing) is moved through part of the small intestine and a balloon at the end of it is inflated to keep the endoscope in place. Next, the outer tube is moved through the small intestine to reach the end of the endoscope, and a balloon at the end of the outer tube is inflated to keep it in place. Then, the balloon at the end of the endoscope is deflated and the endoscope is moved through the next part of the small intestine. These steps are repeated many times as the tubes move through the small intestine. The doctor is able to see the inside of the small intestine through the endoscope and use a tool to remove samples of abnormal tissue. The tissue samples are checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. This procedure may be done if the results of a capsule endoscopy are abnormal. This procedure is also called double balloon enteroscopy. Laparotomy : A surgical procedure in which an incision (cut) is made in the wall of the abdomen to check the inside of the abdomen for signs of disease. The size of the incision depends on the reason the laparotomy is being done. Sometimes organs or lymph nodes are removed or tissue samples are taken and checked under a microscope for signs of disease. Biopsy : The removal of cells or tissues so they can be viewed   under a microscope to check for signs of cancer.  This may be done during an endoscopy or laparotomy.  The  sample is checked by a pathologist to see if it contains cancer cells. Upper GI series with small bowel follow-through : A series of x-rays of the esophagus, stomach, and  small bowel.  The patient drinks a liquid that contains barium (a silver-white metallic compound ).  The liquid coats the esophagus, stomach, and  small bowel.  X-rays are  taken at different times as the barium travels through the upper GI tract and small bowel. CT scan (CAT scan) :  A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles.  The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly.  This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) : A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves , and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis and treatment options depend on the following: The type of small intestine cancer. Whether the cancer is in the inner lining of the small intestine only or has spread into or beyond the wall of the small intestine. Whether the cancer has spread to other places in the body, such as the lymph nodes, liver, or peritoneum (tissue that lines the wall of the abdomen and covers most of the organs in the abdomen). Whether the cancer can be completely removed by surgery . Whether the cancer is newly diagnosed or has recurred . Stages of Small  Intestine Cancer Key Points Tests and procedures to stage small intestine cancer are  usually done at the same time as diagnosis. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. Small intestine cancer is  grouped according to whether or not the tumor can be completely removed by surgery. Small intestine cancer can recur (come back) after it has been treated. Tests and procedures to stage small intestine cancer are  usually done at the same time as diagnosis. Staging is used to find out how far the cancer has spread, but treatment decisions are not based on stage . See the General Information section for a description of tests and procedures used to detect, diagnose , and stage small intestine cancer. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue , the lymph system , and the blood : Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis . Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor ) and travel through the lymph system or blood. Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor ( metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if  small intestine cancer spreads to the liver , the cancer cells in the liver are actually small intestine cancer cells. The disease is metastatic small intestine cancer, not liver cancer . Many cancer deaths are caused when cancer moves from the original tumor and spreads to other tissues and organs. This is called metastatic cancer. This animation shows how cancer cells travel from the place in the body where they first formed to other parts of the body. Small intestine cancer is  grouped according to whether or not the tumor can be completely removed by surgery. Treatment depends on whether the tumor can be removed by surgery and if the cancer is being treated as a primary tumor or is metastatic cancer . Small intestine cancer can recur (come back) after it has been treated. The cancer may come back in the small intestine or in other parts of the body. Treatment Option Overview Key Points There are different types of treatment for patients with small  intestine cancer. The following types of treatment are used: Surgery Radiation therapy Chemotherapy New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Immunotherapy Radiation therapy with radiosensitizers Treatment for small intestine cancer may cause side effects. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with small  intestine cancer. Different types of treatments are available for patients with small  intestine cancer . Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials .  A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the   standard treatment,  the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. The following types of treatment are used: Surgery Surgery is the most common treatment of small intestine cancer.
			 One of the following types of surgery may be done: Resection :  Surgery to remove part or all of an organ that contains cancer. The resection may include the small intestine and nearby organs (if the cancer has spread). The doctor may remove the section of the  small intestine that contains cancer and perform an anastomosis (joining the cut ends of the intestine
				together). The doctor will usually remove lymph nodes near the small intestine and examine them under
				a microscope to see whether they contain cancer. Bypass : Surgery to allow food in the small intestine to go around (bypass) a tumor that is blocking the intestine but cannot be removed. After the doctor removes all the cancer that can be seen at the time of the surgery, some patients may be given radiation therapy after surgery to kill any cancer cells that are left. Treatment given after the surgery, to lower the risk that the cancer will come back, is called adjuvant therapy . Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the area of the body with cancer. External radiation therapy is used to treat small intestine cancer. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing.   When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body ( systemic chemotherapy ). New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website . Immunotherapy Immunotherapy is a treatment that uses the patient's immune system to fight cancer.  Substances made by the body or made in a laboratory are used to boost, direct, or restore the body's natural defenses against cancer. Radiation therapy with radiosensitizers Radiosensitizers are drugs that make tumor cells more sensitive to radiation therapy. Combining radiation therapy with radiosensitizers may kill more tumor cells. Treatment for small intestine cancer may cause side effects. For information about side effects caused by treatment for cancer, visit our Side Effects page. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer  treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment . Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first  to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. Information about clinical trials supported by NCI can be found on NCI’s clinical trials search webpage. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. Follow-up tests may be needed. As you go through treatment, you  will have follow-up tests or check-ups. Some tests that were done to diagnose or stage the cancer may be repeated to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). Treatment of Small Intestine Adenocarcinoma For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. When possible, treatment of small  intestine adenocarcinoma will be surgery to remove the tumor and some of the normal tissue around it. Treatment of small  intestine adenocarcinoma that cannot be removed by surgery may include the following: Surgery to bypass the tumor. Radiation therapy as palliative therapy to relieve symptoms and improve the patient's quality of life . A clinical trial of radiation therapy with radiosensitizers , with or without chemotherapy . A clinical trial of new anticancer drugs . A clinical trial of immunotherapy . Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information about clinical trials is also available. Treatment of Small  Intestine Leiomyosarcoma For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. When possible, treatment of small intestine leiomyosarcoma will be surgery to remove the tumor and some of the normal tissue around it. Treatment of small  intestine leiomyosarcoma that cannot be removed by surgery may include the following: Surgery (to bypass the tumor) and radiation therapy . Surgery, radiation therapy, or chemotherapy as palliative therapy to relieve symptoms and improve the patient's quality of life . A clinical trial of new anticancer drugs. A clinical trial of immunotherapy . Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information about clinical trials is also available. Treatment of Recurrent Small  Intestine Cancer For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of recurrent small intestine cancer that has spread to other parts of the body is usually a clinical trial of new anticancer drugs or immunotherapy . Treatment of locally recurrent small  intestine cancer may include the following: Surgery . Radiation therapy or chemotherapy as palliative therapy to relieve symptoms and improve the patient's quality of life . A clinical trial of radiation therapy with radiosensitizers , with or without chemotherapy. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information about clinical trials is also available. To Learn More About Small Intestine Cancer For more information from the National Cancer Institute about  small intestine cancer, see the following: Small Intestine Cancer Home Page Immunotherapy to Treat Cancer For general cancer information and other resources from the National Cancer Institute, visit: About Cancer Cancer Staging Chemotherapy and You: Support for People With Cancer Radiation Therapy and You: Support for People With Cancer Coping with Cancer Questions to Ask Your Doctor about Cancer For Survivors, Caregivers, and Advocates About This PDQ Summary About PDQ Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish . PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. Purpose of This Summary This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about the treatment of small intestine cancer.  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Reviewers and Updates Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board . Clinical Trial Information A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website . For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). Permission to Use This Summary PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Adult Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Small Intestine Cancer Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/small-intestine/patient/small-intestine-treatment-pdq .  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389461] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online . Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. Disclaimer The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. Contact Us More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us . Updated: May 17, 2023 If you would like to reproduce some or all of this content, see Reuse of NCI Information for guidance about copyright and permissions. In the case of permitted digital reproduction, please credit the National Cancer Institute as the source and link to the original NCI product using the original product's title; e.g., “Small Intestine Cancer Treatment (PDQ®)–Patient Version was originally published by the National Cancer Institute.” Want to use this content on your website or other digital platform? Our syndication services page shows you how. Print Email Back To Top About About This Website en Español Reuse & Copyright Social Media Resources Contact Us Publications Dictionary of Cancer Terms Find a Clinical Trial Policies Accessibility FOIA Privacy & Security Disclaimers Vulnerability Disclosure Sign up for email updates Enter your email address Sign up National Cancer Institute at the National Institutes of Health Contact Us Live Chat 1-800-4-CANCER NCIinfo@nih.gov Site Feedback Follow us Facebook Follow on X Instagram Youtube Linkedin U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health National Cancer Institute USA.gov