Treatment of Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors - NCI Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Español Menu Search Search About Cancer Cancer Types Research Grants & Training News & Events About NCI Home Cancer Types Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancer Patient Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors Treatment (PDQ®)–Patient Version Print Email Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancer Patient Childhood Ovarian Cancer Treatment Treatment of Ovarian Epithelial, Fallopian Tube, & Primary Peritoneal Cancer Treatment of Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors Treatment of Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors Prevention of Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, & Primary Peritoneal Cancer Screening for Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, & Primary Peritoneal Cancer Health Professional Research Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors Treatment (PDQ®)–Patient Version On This Page General Information About Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors Stages of Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors Treatment Option Overview Treatment of Stage I Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors Treatment of Stage II Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors Treatment of Stage III Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors Treatment of Stage IV Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors Treatment of Recurrent Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors To Learn More About Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors About This PDQ Summary General Information About Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors Go to Health Professional Version Key Points Ovarian germ cell tumor is a disease in which malignant
		  (cancer) cells form in the germ (egg) cells of the ovary. Signs of ovarian germ cell tumor are swelling of the
		  abdomen or vaginal bleeding after menopause. Tests that examine the ovaries, pelvic area, blood, and ovarian
		  tissue are used to diagnose  ovarian germ cell tumor. Certain factors affect prognosis
		  (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Ovarian germ cell tumor is a disease in which malignant
		  (cancer) cells form in the germ (egg) cells of the ovary. Germ cell tumors begin
		  in the reproductive cells (egg or sperm ) of the body. Ovarian germ
		  cell tumors usually occur in teenage girls or young women and most often affect
		  just one ovary . The ovaries are a pair of organs in the female reproductive system . They are
		  in the pelvis , one on each
		  side of the uterus (the hollow,
		  pear-shaped organ where a fetus grows). Each ovary is about the size and shape of an almond. The ovaries
		  make eggs and female hormones . Enlarge Anatomy of the female reproductive system. The organs in the female reproductive system include the uterus, ovaries, fallopian tubes, cervix, and vagina. The uterus has a muscular outer layer called the myometrium and an inner lining called the endometrium. Ovarian germ cell tumor is a general name that is used to describe
		  several different types of cancer . The
		  most common ovarian germ cell tumor is called dysgerminoma . See the following PDQ summaries for information
		  about other types of ovarian tumors : Ovarian Epithelial, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancer Treatment Ovarian
		  Low Malignant Potential Tumors Treatment Signs of ovarian germ cell tumor are swelling of the
		  abdomen or vaginal bleeding after menopause. Ovarian germ cell tumors can be hard to diagnose (find) early.
		  Often there are no symptoms in the
		  early stages , but
		  tumors may be found during regular gynecologic exams (checkups). Check with your doctor if you have either of the following: Swollen abdomen without weight gain in other
		  parts of the body. Bleeding from the vagina after menopause (when you are no longer having menstrual periods). Tests that examine the ovaries, pelvic area, blood, and ovarian
		  tissue are used to diagnose  ovarian germ cell tumor. The following tests and procedures may be used: Physical exam and health history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patient’s health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. Pelvic exam : An exam of the vagina, cervix , uterus, fallopian tubes , ovaries, and rectum .     A speculum is inserted into the vagina and the doctor or nurse looks at the vagina and cervix for signs of disease.  A Pap test of the cervix is usually done.  The doctor or nurse also inserts one or two lubricated , gloved fingers of one hand into the vagina and places the other hand over the lower abdomen to feel the size, shape, and position of the uterus and ovaries. The doctor or nurse also inserts a lubricated, gloved finger into the rectum to feel for lumps or abnormal areas. Enlarge Pelvic exam. A doctor or nurse inserts one or two lubricated, gloved fingers of one hand into the vagina and presses on the lower abdomen with the other hand. This is done to feel the size, shape, and position of the uterus and ovaries. The vagina, cervix,  fallopian tubes, and rectum are also checked. Laparotomy : A surgical procedure in which an incision (cut) is made in the wall of the abdomen to check the inside of the abdomen for signs of disease. The size of the incision depends on the reason the laparotomy is being done. Sometimes organs are removed or tissue samples are taken and checked under a microscope for signs of disease. CT scan (CAT scan) :
		  A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles.  The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly.  This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. Serum tumor marker test : A procedure in which a sample of blood is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by organs, tissues, or tumor cells in the body. Certain substances are linked to specific types of cancer when found in increased levels in the blood. These are called tumor markers . An increased level of alpha fetoprotein (AFP) or human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) in the blood may be a sign of ovarian germ cell tumor. Certain factors affect prognosis
		  (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis and treatment options depend on
		  the following: The type
		  of cancer. The size of the tumor. The stage of cancer (whether it affects part
		  of the ovary, involves the whole ovary, or has spread to other places in the
		  body). The way the cancer cells look under a microscope. The patient’s
		  general health. Ovarian germ cell tumors are usually cured if found and
		  treated early. Stages of Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors Key Points After ovarian germ cell tumor has been diagnosed, tests
		  are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the ovary or to other
		  parts of the body. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. The following stages are used for ovarian germ cell
		  tumors: Stage I Stage II Stage III Stage IV Ovarian germ cell tumor can recur (come back) after it as been treated. After ovarian germ cell tumor has been diagnosed, tests
		  are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the ovary or to other
		  parts of the body. The process used to find out whether cancer has spread within the ovary or to other parts of the body
		  is called staging . The information gathered from the
		  staging process determines the stage of the disease. Unless a doctor is sure the cancer has spread from the ovaries to other parts
		  of the body, an
		  operation called a laparotomy is done to see if  the cancer has spread. The
		  doctor must cut into the abdomen and
		  carefully look at all the organs to see if they have cancer in them. The doctor will
		  cut out small pieces of tissue so they can be checked  under a microscope for signs of cancer. The doctor may also wash the abdominal cavity with fluid , which is also checked  under a microscope to see if it has cancer cells in it.
		  Usually the doctor will remove the cancer and other organs that have cancer in them
		  during the laparotomy. It is important
		  to know the stage  in
		  order to plan treatment. Many of the tests used to diagnose ovarian germ cell tumor are also used for staging.
		  The following tests and procedures may also be used for staging: PET scan (positron emission tomography scan) : A procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the body.  A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein .  The PET scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body.  Malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do. MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) : A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves , and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). Transvaginal ultrasound exam : A procedure used to examine the vagina , uterus , fallopian tubes , and bladder . An ultrasound transducer (probe) is inserted into the vagina and used to bounce high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) off internal tissues or organs and make echoes. The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram . The doctor can identify tumors by looking at the sonogram. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue , the lymph system , and the blood : Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis . Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor ) and travel through the lymph system or blood. Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor ( metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of tumor as the primary tumor. For example, if  an ovarian germ cell tumor spreads to the liver , the tumor cells in the liver are actually cancerous ovarian germ cells. The disease is metastatic ovarian germ cell tumor, not liver cancer. Many cancer deaths are caused when cancer moves from the original tumor and spreads to other tissues and organs. This is called metastatic cancer. This animation shows how cancer cells travel from the place in the body where they first formed to other parts of the body. The following stages are used for ovarian germ cell
		  tumors: Stage I Enlarge In stage IA, cancer is found inside a single ovary or fallopian tube. In stage IB, cancer is found inside both ovaries or fallopian tubes. In stage IC, cancer is found inside one or both ovaries or fallopian tubes and one of the following is true: (a) either the tumor or the capsule (outer covering) of the ovary has ruptured (broken open), or (b) cancer is also found on the surface of the ovary or fallopian tube, or (c) cancer cells are found in the pelvic peritoneal fluid. In stage I , cancer is found in one or both ovaries or fallopian tubes . Stage I is divided into stage IA, stage
			 IB, and stage IC. Stage IA: Cancer is found inside a single ovary or fallopian tube. Stage IB: Cancer is found inside both ovaries or fallopian tubes. Stage IC: Cancer is found inside  one or both ovaries or fallopian tubes and one of the following is true: the tumor ruptured (broke open) during surgery ; or the capsule (outer covering) of the ovary ruptured before surgery, or there is cancer on the surface of the ovary or fallopian tube; or cancer cells are found in the fluid of the peritoneal cavity (the body cavity that contains
					 most of the organs in the abdomen ) or  in washings of the peritoneum ( tissue lining the peritoneal
					 cavity). Stage II Enlarge In stage IIA, cancer is found in one or both ovaries or fallopian tubes and has spread to the uterus and/or the fallopian tubes and/or the ovaries. In stage IIB, cancer is found in one or both ovaries or fallopian tubes and has spread to organs in the peritoneal cavity, such as the colon. In primary peritoneal cancer,  cancer is found in the pelvic peritoneum and has not spread there from another part of the body. In stage II , cancer is found in one or both ovaries or fallopian tubes and has spread into other areas of the pelvis , or primary peritoneal cancer is found within the pelvis.  Stage II is divided into
			 stage IIA and stage IIB. Stage IIA: Cancer has spread from where it first formed to the uterus and/or 
				the fallopian tubes and/or the ovaries. Stage IIB: Cancer has spread from the ovary or fallopian tube to organs in  the peritoneal cavity (the body cavity that contains most of the organs in the abdomen ). Enlarge Tumor sizes are often measured in centimeters (cm) or inches. Common food items that can be used to show tumor size in cm include: a pea (1 cm), a peanut (2 cm), a grape (3 cm), a walnut (4 cm), a lime (5 cm or 2 inches), an egg (6 cm), a peach (7 cm), and a grapefruit (10 cm or 4 inches). Stage III In stage III , cancer is found in one or both ovaries or fallopian tubes , or is primary peritoneal cancer , and has spread outside the pelvis to other parts of the abdomen and/or to nearby lymph nodes .
			  Stage III is divided into stage IIIA, stage
			 IIIB, and stage IIIC. In stage IIIA, one of the following is true: Cancer has spread to lymph nodes behind the peritoneum only;      or Cancer cells that can be seen only with a microscope have spread to the surface of the peritoneum outside the pelvis, such as the omentum (a fold of the peritoneum that surrounds the stomach and other organs in the abdomen). Cancer may have spread to nearby lymph nodes. Enlarge In stage IIIA, cancer is found in one or both ovaries or fallopian tubes and (a) cancer has spread to lymph nodes behind the peritoneum only, or (b) cancer cells that can be seen only with a microscope have spread to the surface of the peritoneum outside the pelvis, such as the omentum. Cancer may have also spread to nearby lymph nodes. Stage IIIB: Cancer has spread to the peritoneum outside the pelvis, such as the omentum, and the cancer in the peritoneum is 2 centimeters or smaller. Cancer may have spread to lymph nodes behind the peritoneum. Enlarge In stage IIIB, cancer is found in one or both ovaries or fallopian tubes and has spread to the peritoneum outside the pelvis, such as the omentum. The cancer in the omentum is 2 centimeters or smaller. Cancer may have also spread to lymph nodes behind the peritoneum. Stage IIIC: Cancer has spread to the peritoneum outside the pelvis, such as the omentum, and the cancer in the peritoneum is
				larger than 2 centimeters. Cancer may have spread to lymph nodes behind the peritoneum or to the surface of the liver or spleen . Enlarge In stage IIIC, cancer is found in one or both ovaries or fallopian tubes and has spread to the peritoneum outside the pelvis, such as the omentum. The cancer in the omentum is larger than 2 centimeters. Cancer may have also spread to lymph nodes behind the peritoneum or to the surface of the liver or spleen (not shown). Stage IV Enlarge In stage IV, cancer has spread beyond the abdomen to other parts of the body. In stage IVA, cancer cells are found in extra fluid that builds up around the lungs. In stage IVB, cancer has spread to organs and tissues outside the abdomen, including the lung, liver, and lymph nodes in the groin. In stage IV , cancer has spread beyond the abdomen to other parts of the body. Stage IV is divided into stage IVA and stage IVB. Stage IVA: Cancer cells are found in  extra fluid that builds up  around the lungs . Stage IVB: Cancer has spread to organs and tissues outside the abdomen, including lymph nodes in the groin . Ovarian germ cell tumor can recur (come back) after it as been treated. The cancer may come back in the other ovary or in other parts of the body. Treatment Option Overview Key Points There are different types of treatment for patients with ovarian germ cell
		  tumors. Four types of standard treatment are used: Surgery Observation Chemotherapy Radiation therapy New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. High-dose chemotherapy with bone marrow
			 transplant New treatment options Treatment for ovarian germ cell tumors may cause side effects. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with ovarian germ cell
		  tumors. Different types of treatment are available for patients with ovarian germ cell tumor . Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some
		  are being tested in clinical trials .
		   A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help
		  improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients
		  with cancer . When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the
		  standard treatment, the new
		  treatment may become the standard treatment.   Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Four types of standard treatment are used: Surgery Surgery is the most common
			 treatment of ovarian germ cell tumor. A doctor may take out the
			 cancer using one of the following
			 types of surgery. Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy : A surgical procedure to remove one ovary and one fallopian tube . Total hysterectomy : A surgical procedure to remove the uterus , including the cervix .  If the uterus and cervix are taken out through the vagina , the operation is called a vaginal hysterectomy.  If the uterus and cervix are taken out through a large incision (cut) in the abdomen , the operation is called a total abdominal hysterectomy.  If the uterus and cervix are taken out through a small incision (cut) in the abdomen using a laparoscope , the operation is called a total laparoscopic hysterectomy. Enlarge Hysterectomy. The uterus is surgically removed with or without other organs or tissues. In a total hysterectomy, the uterus and cervix are removed. In a total hysterectomy with salpingo-oophorectomy, (a) the uterus plus one (unilateral) ovary and fallopian tube are removed; or (b) the uterus plus both (bilateral) ovaries and fallopian tubes are removed. In a radical hysterectomy, the uterus, cervix, both ovaries, both fallopian tubes, and nearby tissue are removed. These procedures are done using a low transverse incision or a vertical incision. Bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy : A surgical procedure to remove both ovaries and both fallopian tubes. Tumor debulking :
				A surgical procedure in which as much of the tumor as possible is removed.  Some tumors cannot be completely removed. After the doctor removes all the cancer that can be seen at the
		  time of the surgery, some patients may be given chemotherapy or radiation therapy
		  after surgery to kill any cancer cells that are left. Treatment given after the
		  surgery, to lower the risk that the cancer will come back, is called adjuvant therapy . After chemotherapy for an ovarian germ cell tumor, a second-look laparotomy may be done. This is similar to the laparotomy that is done to find out the stage of the cancer. Second-look laparotomy is a surgical procedure to find out if tumor cells are left after primary treatment . During this procedure, the doctor will take samples of lymph nodes and other tissues in the abdomen to see if any cancer is left. This procedure is not done for dysgerminomas . Observation Observation is closely watching a patient’s condition without giving any treatment unless signs or symptoms appear or change. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing.  When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body ( systemic chemotherapy ).  When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid , an organ , or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas ( regional chemotherapy ). Combination chemotherapy is treatment using more than one anticancer drug. The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. See Drugs Approved for Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, or Primary Peritoneal Cancer for more information. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the area of the body with cancer. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website . High-dose chemotherapy with bone marrow
			 transplant High-dose chemotherapy with bone marrow
			 transplant is a method of giving very high doses of chemotherapy and replacing blood -forming cells destroyed by the cancer treatment. Stem cells (immature blood cells) are removed from the bone marrow of the patient or a donor and are frozen and stored.  After the chemotherapy is completed, the stored stem cells are thawed and given back to the patient through an infusion .  These reinfused stem cells grow into (and restore) the body’s blood cells. New treatment options Combination
			 chemotherapy (the use of more than one anticancer drug) is being tested in clinical trials. Treatment for ovarian germ cell tumors may cause side effects. For information about side effects caused by treatment for cancer, visit our Side Effects page. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer  treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment . Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first  to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. Information about clinical trials supported by NCI can be found on NCI’s clinical trials search webpage. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. Follow-up tests may be needed. As you go through treatment, you  will have follow-up tests or check-ups. Some tests that were done to diagnose or stage the cancer may be repeated to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). Treatment of Stage I Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment depends on whether the tumor is a dysgerminoma or another type of ovarian germ cell tumor . Treatment of dysgerminoma may include the following: Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy with or
			 without lymphangiography or CT scan . Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by observation . Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by radiation therapy . Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by chemotherapy . Treatment of other ovarian germ cell tumors may be either: unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by careful
			 observation; or unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, sometimes followed by combination chemotherapy . Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information about clinical trials is also available. Treatment of Stage II Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment depends on whether the tumor is a dysgerminoma or another
		  type of ovarian germ cell tumor . Treatment of dysgerminoma may be either: total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by radiation therapy or combination chemotherapy ; or unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by chemotherapy . Treatment of other ovarian germ cell tumors may include the following: Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by combination
			 chemotherapy. Second-look laparotomy ( surgery done after primary treatment to see if tumor cells remain). A clinical trial of a new treatment. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information about clinical trials is also available. Treatment of Stage III Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment depends on whether the tumor is a dysgerminoma or another
		  type of ovarian germ cell tumor . Treatment of dysgerminoma may include the following: Total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy , with
			 removal of as much of the cancer in
			 the pelvis and abdomen as possible. Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by chemotherapy . Treatment of other ovarian germ cell tumors may include the following: Total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, with
			 removal of as much of the cancer in the pelvis and abdomen as possible.
			 Chemotherapy will be given before and/or after surgery . Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by chemotherapy. Second-look laparotomy ( surgery done after primary treatment to see if tumor cells remain). A clinical trial of a new treatment. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information about clinical trials is also available. Treatment of Stage IV Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment depends on whether the tumor is a dysgerminoma or another
		  type of ovarian germ cell tumor . Treatment of dysgerminoma may include the following: Total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by chemotherapy , with removal of as much of the cancer in the pelvis and abdomen as possible. Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by chemotherapy. Treatment of other ovarian germ cell tumors may include the following: Total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, with
			 removal of as much of the cancer in the pelvis and abdomen as possible.
			 Chemotherapy will be given before and/or after surgery . Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by chemotherapy. Second-look laparotomy ( surgery done after primary treatment to see if tumor cells remain). A clinical trial of a new treatment. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information about clinical trials is also available. Treatment of Recurrent Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment depends on whether the tumor is a dysgerminoma or another type of ovarian germ cell tumor . Treatment of dysgerminoma may be: Chemotherapy with or
		  without radiation
		  therapy . Treatment of other ovarian germ cell tumors may include the following: Chemotherapy. Surgery with or
		  without chemotherapy. A clinical trial of high-dose chemotherapy followed by bone marrow
		  transplant . A clinical trial of a new treatment. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information about clinical trials is also available. To Learn More About Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors For more information from the National Cancer Institute about  ovarian germ cell tumors, see the following: Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancer

 Home Page Drugs Approved for Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, or Primary Peritoneal Cancer For general cancer information and other resources from the National Cancer Institute, visit: About Cancer Cancer Staging Chemotherapy and You: Support for People With Cancer Radiation Therapy and You: Support for People With Cancer Coping with Cancer Questions to Ask Your Doctor about Cancer For Survivors, Caregivers, and Advocates About This PDQ Summary About PDQ Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish . PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. Purpose of This Summary This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about the treatment of ovarian germ cell tumors.  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Reviewers and Updates Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board . Clinical Trial Information A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website . For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). Permission to Use This Summary PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Adult Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/ovarian/patient/ovarian-germ-cell-treatment-pdq .  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389363] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online . Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. Disclaimer The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. Contact Us More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us . Updated: July 7, 2022 If you would like to reproduce some or all of this content, see Reuse of NCI Information for guidance about copyright and permissions. In the case of permitted digital reproduction, please credit the National Cancer Institute as the source and link to the original NCI product using the original product's title; e.g., “Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors Treatment (PDQ®)–Patient Version was originally published by the National Cancer Institute.” Want to use this content on your website or other digital platform? Our syndication services page shows you how. Print Email Back To Top About About This Website en Español Reuse & Copyright Social Media Resources Contact Us Publications Dictionary of Cancer Terms Find a Clinical Trial Policies Accessibility FOIA Privacy & Security Disclaimers Vulnerability Disclosure Sign up for email updates Enter your email address Sign up National Cancer Institute at the National Institutes of Health Contact Us Live Chat 1-800-4-CANCER NCIinfo@nih.gov Site Feedback Follow us Facebook Follow on X Instagram Youtube Linkedin U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health National Cancer Institute USA.gov