Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, & Primary Peritoneal Cancers Screening - NCI Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Español Menu Search Search About Cancer Cancer Types Research Grants & Training News & Events About NCI Home Cancer Types Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancer Patient Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancers Screening (PDQ®)–Patient Version Print Email Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancer Patient Childhood Ovarian Cancer Treatment Treatment of Ovarian Epithelial, Fallopian Tube, & Primary Peritoneal Cancer Treatment of Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors Treatment of Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors Prevention of Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, & Primary Peritoneal Cancer Screening for Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, & Primary Peritoneal Cancer Health Professional Research Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancers Screening (PDQ®)–Patient Version On This Page What Is Screening? General Information About Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancers Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancers Screening Risks of Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancers Screening About This PDQ Summary What Is Screening? Go to Health Professional Version Screening is  looking for cancer before a person has any symptoms . This can help find
		cancer at an early stage . When abnormal tissue or cancer is found early, it may
		be easier to treat. By the time symptoms  appear, cancer may have begun
		to  spread. Scientists are trying to better understand which
		people are more likely to get certain types of cancer. They also study the things
		we do and the things around us to see if they cause  cancer. This
		information helps doctors recommend who should be screened for cancer, which
		screening tests should be used, and how often the tests should be done. It is important to remember that your doctor does not necessarily
		think you have cancer if he or she suggests a  screening test. Screening
		tests are given when you  have no cancer symptoms. If a screening test result is abnormal, you may need to have more tests done to find out if you have cancer. These are called diagnostic tests . General Information About Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancers Key Points Ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers are diseases in which malignant (cancer) cells
		  form in the ovaries, fallopian tubes, or peritoneum. In the United States, ovarian cancer is the sixth-leading cause of death from cancer  in women. Different factors increase or decrease the risk of getting ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers. Ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers are diseases in which malignant (cancer) cells
		  form in the ovaries, fallopian tubes, or peritoneum. The ovaries are a pair
		  of organs in the female reproductive
		  system . They are in the pelvis , one on each side of the uterus (the hollow, pear-shaped
		  organ where a fetus grows). Each
		  ovary is about the size and shape of an almond. The ovaries make eggs and
		  female hormones ( chemicals that
		  control the way certain cells or
		  organs work in the body). The fallopian tubes are a pair of long, slender tubes, one on each side of the uterus. Eggs pass from the ovaries, through the fallopian tubes, to the uterus. Cancer sometimes begins at the end of the fallopian tube near the ovary and spreads to the ovary. The peritoneum is the tissue that lines the abdominal wall and covers organs in the abdomen . Primary peritoneal cancer is cancer that forms in the peritoneum and has not spread there from another part of the body. Cancer sometimes begins in the peritoneum and spreads to the ovary. Ovarian epithelial cancer , fallopian tube cancer , and primary peritoneal cancer form in the same type of tissue. Studies of screening tests look at these cancers together. Enlarge Anatomy of the female reproductive system. The organs in the female reproductive system include the uterus, ovaries, fallopian tubes, cervix, and vagina. The uterus has a muscular outer layer called the myometrium and an inner lining called the endometrium. Other PDQ summaries containing information related to ovarian , fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers include: Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancers Prevention Genetics of Breast and Gynecologic Cancers (written for health professionals) Ovarian Epithelial, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancers Treatment In the United States, ovarian cancer is the sixth-leading cause of death from cancer  in women. While ovarian cancer is rare, it is the sixth-leading cause of  death from cancer in women. It  is also the leading cause of death from cancer of the female reproductive system. The number of new cases of ovarian cancer decreased slightly each year from 1990 to 2019. There was also a slight decrease in the number of deaths from ovarian cancer each year from 2004 to 2021. Different factors increase or decrease the risk of getting ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers. Anything that increases your chance of getting a disease
		  is called a risk factor . Anything that decreases your chance of getting a disease is called a protective factor . Talk to your doctor if you think you may be at risk for ovarian cancer. To learn more, visit Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancers Prevention . Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancers Screening Key Points Tests are used to screen for different types of cancer when a person does  not have symptoms. Screening for ovarian cancer may not help a person live longer. Screening tests that have been studied include: Pelvic exam Transvaginal ultrasound CA-125 blood test Screening tests for ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers are being studied in clinical trials. Tests are used to screen for different types of cancer when a person does  not have symptoms. Scientists study screening tests to find those with the fewest harms and most benefits. Cancer screening trials also are meant to show whether early detection (finding cancer before it causes symptoms )  helps a person live longer or decreases a person's chance of dying from the disease. For some types of cancer, the chance of recovery is better if the disease is found and treated at an early stage . Screening for ovarian cancer may not help a person live longer. Screening tests that have been studied include: Pelvic exam Pelvic exams to screen for ovarian cancer have not been shown to decrease the number of deaths from the disease. A pelvic exam is an exam of the vagina , cervix , uterus , fallopian tubes , ovaries , and rectum .    A speculum is inserted into the vagina, and the doctor or nurse looks at the vagina and cervix for signs of disease.  The doctor or nurse also inserts one or two lubricated , gloved fingers of one hand into the vagina and places the other hand over the lower abdomen to feel the size, shape, and position of the uterus and ovaries. The doctor or nurse also inserts a lubricated, gloved finger into the rectum to feel for lumps or abnormal areas. Enlarge Pelvic exam. A doctor or nurse inserts one or two lubricated, gloved fingers of one hand into the vagina and presses on the lower abdomen with the other hand. This is done to feel the size, shape, and position of the uterus and ovaries. The vagina, cervix,  fallopian tubes, and rectum are also checked. Transvaginal ultrasound Transvaginal ultrasound (TVU) to screen for ovarian cancer has not been shown to decrease the number of deaths from the disease. TVU is a procedure used to examine the vagina, uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries, and bladder . An ultrasound transducer (probe)  is inserted into the vagina and used to bounce high-energy sound waves off internal tissues or organs in the pelvis. These sound waves make echoes that form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram . Enlarge Transvaginal ultrasound. An ultrasound probe connected to a computer is inserted into the vagina and is gently moved to show different organs. The probe bounces sound waves off internal organs and tissues to make echoes that form a sonogram (computer picture). CA-125 blood test A CA-125 blood test measures the level of CA-125, a substance released by cells into the bloodstream. An increased CA-125 level may be a sign of certain types of cancer, including ovarian cancer, or other conditions. Studies have also shown that using CA-125 levels and TVU together to screen for ovarian cancer does not decrease the number of deaths from ovarian cancer. Screening tests for ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers are being studied in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials supported by NCI can be found on NCI’s clinical trials search webpage. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. Risks of Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancers Screening Key Points Screening tests have risks. The risks of ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers        screening tests include: Finding ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers may not improve health or help a  woman live
			 longer. False-negative test results can occur. False-positive test results can occur. Screening tests have risks. Decisions about screening tests can be difficult. Not all screening tests are helpful, and most have risks. Before having any screening test, you may
		  want to talk about  the test with your doctor.  It is important to know the risks of
		  the test and whether it has been proven to reduce the risk of dying from cancer . The risks of ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers        screening tests include: Finding ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers may not improve health or help a  woman live
			 longer. Screening
			 may not improve your health or help  you live longer if  you have advanced ovarian cancer or if it has already spread to
			 other places in  your body. False-negative test results can occur. Screening test results may appear to be normal even though ovarian cancer is
			 present. A woman who receives a false-negative test result (one that
			 shows there is no cancer when there really is) may delay seeking medical care  even if there are symptoms. False-positive test results can occur. Screening test results may appear to be abnormal even though no
			 cancer is present. A false-positive test result (one that shows there is cancer when there really isn't) can cause anxiety and is usually followed by more  tests and procedures  (such as
			  a laparoscopy or a laparotomy to see if cancer is present), which also have risks. Problems caused by tests used to diagnose ovarian cancer include infection , blood loss, bowel injury, and heart and blood vessel problems. A false-positive test result can also lead to an unneeded oophorectomy (removal of one or both ovaries ). About This PDQ Summary About PDQ Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish . PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. Purpose of This Summary This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers screening.  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Reviewers and Updates Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Screening and Prevention Editorial Board . Clinical Trial Information A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website . For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). Permission to Use This Summary PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Screening and Prevention Editorial Board. PDQ Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancers Screening. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/ovarian/patient/ovarian-screening-pdq .  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389490] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online . Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. Disclaimer The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. Contact Us More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us . Updated: February 12, 2025 If you would like to reproduce some or all of this content, see Reuse of NCI Information for guidance about copyright and permissions. In the case of permitted digital reproduction, please credit the National Cancer Institute as the source and link to the original NCI product using the original product's title; e.g., “Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancers Screening (PDQ®)–Patient Version was originally published by the National Cancer Institute.” Want to use this content on your website or other digital platform? Our syndication services page shows you how. Print Email Back To Top About About This Website en Español Reuse & Copyright Social Media Resources Contact Us Publications Dictionary of Cancer Terms Find a Clinical Trial Policies Accessibility FOIA Privacy & Security Disclaimers Vulnerability Disclosure Sign up for email updates Enter your email address Sign up National Cancer Institute at the National Institutes of Health Contact Us Live Chat 1-800-4-CANCER NCIinfo@nih.gov Site Feedback Follow us Facebook Follow on X Instagram Youtube Linkedin U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health National Cancer Institute USA.gov