Isolated Pierre Robin sequence: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Isolated Pierre Robin sequence URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/isolated-pierre-robin-sequence/ Isolated Pierre Robin sequence To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Pierre Robin sequence is a set of abnormalities affecting the head and face, consisting of a small lower jaw ( micrognathia ), a tongue that is placed further back than normal (glossoptosis), and blockage (obstruction) of the airways. Most people with Pierre Robin sequence are also born with an opening in the roof of the mouth (a cleft palate ). This feature is not generally considered necessary for diagnosis of the condition, although there is some disagreement among doctors. Some people have the features of Pierre Robin sequence as part of a syndrome that affects other organs and tissues in the body, such as Stickler syndrome or campomelic dysplasia . These instances are described as syndromic. When Pierre Robin sequence occurs by itself, it is described as nonsyndromic or isolated. Approximately 20 to 40 percent of cases of Pierre Robin sequence are isolated. This condition is described as a "sequence" because one of its features, underdevelopment of the lower jaw (mandible), sets off a sequence of events before birth that cause the other signs and symptoms. Specifically, having an abnormally small jaw affects placement of the tongue, and the abnormally positioned tongue can block the airways. In addition, micrognathia and glossoptosis affect formation of the palate during development before birth, which often leads to cleft palate. The combination of features characteristic of Pierre Robin sequence can lead to difficulty breathing and problems eating early in life. As a result, some affected babies have an inability to grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive). In some children with Pierre Robin sequence, growth of the mandible catches up, and as adults these individuals have normal-sized chins. Frequency Isolated Pierre Robin sequence affects an estimated 1 in 8,500 to 14,000 people. Causes Changes in the DNA near the SOX9 gene are the most common genetic cause of isolated Pierre Robin sequence. It is likely that changes in other genes, some of which have not been identified, are also involved in the condition. Doctors speculate that nongenetic factors, for example conditions during pregnancy that restrict growth of the jaw, may cause some cases of isolated Pierre Robin sequence. The SOX9 gene provides instructions for making a protein that plays a critical role in the formation of many different tissues and organs during embryonic development. The SOX9 protein regulates the activity of other genes, especially those that are important for development of the skeleton, including the mandible. The genetic changes near the SOX9 gene that are associated with isolated Pierre Robin sequence are thought to disrupt regions of DNA called enhancers, which normally regulate the activity of the SOX9 gene. These changes reduce SOX9 gene activity. As a result, the SOX9 protein cannot properly control the genes essential for normal development of the lower jaw, causing micrognathia, and consequently, glossoptosis, airway obstruction, and, often, cleft palate. Learn more about the gene associated with Isolated Pierre Robin sequence SOX9 Inheritance Isolated Pierre Robin sequence is usually not inherited. It typically results from new (de novo) genetic changes and occurs in people with no history of the disorder in their family. When the condition is inherited, it follows an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the DNA alteration in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Syndromic Pierre Robin sequence is inherited in the same pattern as the condition it is associated with. Other Names for This Condition Glossoptosis, micrognathia, and cleft palate Pierre Robin syndrome Pierre-Robin syndrome Robin sequence Robin syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Isolated Pierre-Robin syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Isolated Pierre Robin syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PIERRE ROBIN SYNDROME; PRBNS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Amarillo IE, Dipple KM, Quintero-Rivera F. Familial microdeletion of 17q24.3
upstream of SOX9 is associated with isolated Pierre Robin sequence due to
position effect. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 May;161A(5):1167-72. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.35847. Epub 2013 Mar 26. Citation on PubMed Benko S, Fantes JA, Amiel J, Kleinjan DJ, Thomas S, Ramsay J, Jamshidi N,
Essafi A, Heaney S, Gordon CT, McBride D, Golzio C, Fisher M, Perry P, Abadie V,
Ayuso C, Holder-Espinasse M, Kilpatrick N, Lees MM, Picard A, Temple IK, Thomas
P, Vazquez MP, Vekemans M, Roest Crollius H, Hastie ND, Munnich A, Etchevers HC,
Pelet A, Farlie PG, Fitzpatrick DR, Lyonnet S. Highly conserved non-coding
elements on either side of SOX9 associated with Pierre Robin sequence. Nat Genet.
2009 Mar;41(3):359-64. doi: 10.1038/ng.329. Epub 2009 Feb 22. Citation on PubMed Cote A, Fanous A, Almajed A, Lacroix Y. Pierre Robin sequence: review of
diagnostic and treatment challenges. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2015
Apr;79(4):451-64. doi: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2015.01.035. Epub 2015 Feb 7. Citation on PubMed Gordon CT, Attanasio C, Bhatia S, Benko S, Ansari M, Tan TY, Munnich A,
Pennacchio LA, Abadie V, Temple IK, Goldenberg A, van Heyningen V, Amiel J,
FitzPatrick D, Kleinjan DA, Visel A, Lyonnet S. Identification of novel
craniofacial regulatory domains located far upstream of SOX9 and disrupted in
Pierre Robin sequence. Hum Mutat. 2014 Aug;35(8):1011-20. doi:
10.1002/humu.22606. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Jakobsen LP, Ullmann R, Christensen SB, Jensen KE, Molsted K, Henriksen KF,
Hansen C, Knudsen MA, Larsen LA, Tommerup N, Tumer Z. Pierre Robin sequence may
be caused by dysregulation of SOX9 and KCNJ2. J Med Genet. 2007 Jun;44(6):381-6.
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2006.046177. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Mackay DR. Controversies in the diagnosis and management of the Robin
sequence. J Craniofac Surg. 2011 Mar;22(2):415-20. doi:
10.1097/SCS.0b013e3182074799. Citation on PubMed Tan TY, Farlie PG. Rare syndromes of the head and face-Pierre Robin sequence.
Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol. 2013 May-Jun;2(3):369-77. doi: 10.1002/wdev.69.
Epub 2012 May 14. Citation on PubMed Thouvenin B, Djadi-Prat J, Chalouhi C, Pierrot S, Lyonnet S, Couly G, Abadie
V. Developmental outcome in Pierre Robin sequence: a longitudinal and prospective
study of a consecutive series of severe phenotypes. Am J Med Genet A. 2013
Feb;161A(2):312-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35773. Epub 2013 Jan 9. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Craniofacial Abnormalities Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Micrognathia Pierre Robin sequence Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 1, 2016