Primary macronodular adrenal hyperplasia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Primary macronodular adrenal hyperplasia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/primary-macronodular-adrenal-hyperplasia/ Primary macronodular adrenal hyperplasia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Primary macronodular adrenal hyperplasia (PMAH) is a disorder characterized by multiple lumps (nodules) in the adrenal glands, which are small hormone-producing glands located on top of each kidney. These nodules, which usually are found in both adrenal glands (bilateral) and vary in size, cause adrenal gland enlargement (hyperplasia) and result in the production of higher-than-normal levels of the hormone cortisol. Cortisol is an important hormone that suppresses inflammation and protects the body from physical stress such as infection or trauma through several mechanisms including raising levels of blood glucose, also called blood sugar. PMAH typically becomes evident in a person's forties or fifties. It is considered a form of Cushing syndrome , which is characterized by increased levels of cortisol resulting from one of many possible causes. These increased cortisol levels lead to weight gain in the face and upper body, fragile skin, bone loss, fatigue, and other health problems. However, some people with PMAH do not experience these signs and symptoms and are said to have subclinical Cushing syndrome. Frequency PMAH is a rare disorder. It is present in less than 1 percent of cases of endogenous Cushing syndrome, which describes forms of Cushing syndrome caused by factors internal to the body rather than by external factors such as long-term use of certain medicines called corticosteroids. The prevalence of endogenous Cushing syndrome is about 1 in 26,000 people. Causes In about half of individuals with PMAH, the condition is caused by mutations in the ARMC5 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is thought to act as a tumor suppressor, which means that it helps to prevent cells from growing and dividing too rapidly or in an uncontrolled way. ARMC5 gene mutations are believed to impair the protein's tumor-suppressor function, which allows the overgrowth of certain cells. It is unclear why this overgrowth is limited to the formation of adrenal gland nodules in people with PMAH. PMAH can also be caused by mutations in the GNAS gene. This gene provides instructions for making one component, the stimulatory alpha subunit, of a protein complex called a guanine nucleotide-binding protein (G protein). The G protein produced from the GNAS gene helps stimulate the activity of an enzyme called adenylate cyclase. This enzyme is involved in controlling the production of several hormones that help regulate the activity of certain endocrine glands, including the adrenal glands.  The GNAS gene mutations that cause PMAH are believed to result in an overactive G protein. Research suggests that the overactive G protein may increase levels of adenylate cyclase and result in the overproduction of another compound called cyclic AMP (cAMP). An excess of cAMP may trigger abnormal cell growth and lead to the adrenal nodules characteristic of PMAH. Mutations in other genes, some of which are unknown, can also cause PMAH. Learn more about the genes associated with Primary macronodular adrenal hyperplasia APC ARMC5 FH GNAS MC2R MEN1 Additional Information from NCBI Gene: PDE11A Inheritance People with PMAH caused by ARMC5 gene mutations inherit one copy of the mutated gene in each cell. The inheritance is considered autosomal dominant because one copy of the mutated gene is sufficient to make an individual susceptible to PMAH. However, the condition develops only when affected individuals acquire another mutation in the other copy of the ARMC5 gene in certain cells of the adrenal glands. This second mutation is described as somatic. Instead of being passed from parent to child, somatic mutations are acquired during a person's lifetime and are present only in certain cells. Because somatic mutations are also required for PMAH to occur, some people who have inherited the altered ARMC5 gene never develop the condition, a situation known as reduced penetrance. When PMAH is caused by GNAS gene mutations, the condition is not inherited. The GNAS gene mutations that cause PMAH are somatic mutations. In PMAH, the gene mutation is believed to occur early in embryonic development. Cells with the mutated GNAS gene can be found in both adrenal glands. Other Names for This Condition ACTH-independent macronodular adrenal hyperplasia ACTH-independent macronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia Adrenal Cushing syndrome due to AIMAH Adrenocorticotropic hormone-independent macronodular adrenal hyperplasia AIMAH Corticotropin-independent macronodular adrenal hyperplasia PMAH Primary bilateral macronodular adrenal hyperplasia Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Acth-independent macronodular adrenal hyperplasia 2 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Cushing syndrome due to macronodular adrenal hyperplasia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM ACTH-INDEPENDENT MACRONODULAR ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA; AIMAH1 ACTH-INDEPENDENT MACRONODULAR ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA 2; AIMAH2 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Alencar GA, Lerario AM, Nishi MY, Mariani BM, Almeida MQ, Tremblay J, Hamet P,
Bourdeau I, Zerbini MC, Pereira MA, Gomes GC, Rocha Mde S, Chambo JL, Lacroix A,
Mendonca BB, Fragoso MC. ARMC5 mutations are a frequent cause of primary
macronodular adrenal Hyperplasia. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014
Aug;99(8):E1501-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-4237. Epub 2014 Apr 7. Citation on PubMed Assie G, Libe R, Espiard S, Rizk-Rabin M, Guimier A, Luscap W, Barreau O,
Lefevre L, Sibony M, Guignat L, Rodriguez S, Perlemoine K, Rene-Corail F,
Letourneur F, Trabulsi B, Poussier A, Chabbert-Buffet N, Borson-Chazot F,
Groussin L, Bertagna X, Stratakis CA, Ragazzon B, Bertherat J. ARMC5 mutations in
macronodular adrenal hyperplasia with Cushing's syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2013 Nov
28;369(22):2105-14. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1304603. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central De Venanzi A, Alencar GA, Bourdeau I, Fragoso MC, Lacroix A. Primary bilateral
macronodular adrenal hyperplasia. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2014
Jun;21(3):177-84. doi: 10.1097/MED.0000000000000061. Citation on PubMed Elbelt U, Trovato A, Kloth M, Gentz E, Finke R, Spranger J, Galas D, Weber S,
Wolf C, Konig K, Arlt W, Buttner R, May P, Allolio B, Schneider JG. Molecular and
clinical evidence for an ARMC5 tumor syndrome: concurrent inactivating germline
and somatic mutations are associated with both primary macronodular adrenal
hyperplasia and meningioma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Jan;100(1):E119-28.
doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-2648. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Faucz FR, Zilbermint M, Lodish MB, Szarek E, Trivellin G, Sinaii N, Berthon A,
Libe R, Assie G, Espiard S, Drougat L, Ragazzon B, Bertherat J, Stratakis CA.
Macronodular adrenal hyperplasia due to mutations in an armadillo repeat
containing 5 (ARMC5) gene: a clinical and genetic investigation. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Jun;99(6):E1113-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-4280. Epub 2014
Mar 6. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Fragoso MC, Domenice S, Latronico AC, Martin RM, Pereira MA, Zerbini MC, Lucon
AM, Mendonca BB. Cushing's syndrome secondary to adrenocorticotropin-independent
macronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia due to activating mutations of GNAS1
gene. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 May;88(5):2147-51. doi:
10.1210/jc.2002-021362. Citation on PubMed Gagliardi L, Schreiber AW, Hahn CN, Feng J, Cranston T, Boon H, Hotu C,
Oftedal BE, Cutfield R, Adelson DL, Braund WJ, Gordon RD, Rees DA, Grossman AB,
Torpy DJ, Scott HS. ARMC5 mutations are common in familial bilateral macronodular
adrenal hyperplasia. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Sep;99(9):E1784-92. doi:
10.1210/jc.2014-1265. Epub 2014 Jun 6. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Adrenal Gland Disorders Cushing's Syndrome Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated May 1, 2015