Bart-Pumphrey syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Bart-Pumphrey syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/bart-pumphrey-syndrome/ Bart-Pumphrey syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Bart-Pumphrey syndrome is characterized by nail and skin abnormalities and hearing loss. People with Bart-Pumphrey syndrome typically have a white discoloration of the nails (leukonychia); the nails may also be thick and crumbly. Affected individuals often have wart-like (verrucous) skin growths called knuckle pads on the knuckles of the fingers and toes. They may also have thickening of the skin on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet (palmoplantar keratoderma). The skin abnormalities generally become noticeable during childhood. The hearing loss associated with Bart-Pumphrey syndrome ranges from moderate to profound and is typically present from birth (congenital). The signs and symptoms of this disorder may vary even within the same family; while almost all affected individuals have hearing loss, they may have different combinations of the other associated features. Frequency Bart-Pumphrey syndrome is a rare disorder; its exact prevalence is unknown. Only a few affected families and individual cases have been identified. Causes Bart-Pumphrey syndrome is caused by mutations in the GJB2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called gap junction beta 2, more commonly known as connexin 26. Connexin 26 is a member of the connexin protein family. Connexin proteins form channels called gap junctions that permit the transport of nutrients, charged atoms (ions), and signaling molecules between neighboring cells that are in contact with each other. Gap junctions made with connexin 26 transport potassium ions and certain small molecules. Connexin 26 is found in cells throughout the body, including the inner ear and the skin. In the inner ear, channels made from connexin 26 are found in a snail-shaped structure called the cochlea . These channels may help to maintain the proper level of potassium ions required for the conversion of sound waves to electrical nerve impulses. This conversion is essential for normal hearing. In addition, connexin 26 may be involved in the maturation of certain cells in the cochlea. Connexin 26 also plays a role in the growth, maturation, and stability of the outermost layer of skin (the epidermis ). The GJB2 gene mutations that cause Bart-Pumphrey syndrome change single protein building blocks (amino acids) in the connexin 26 protein. The altered protein probably disrupts the function of normal connexin 26 in cells, and may interfere with the function of other connexin proteins. This disruption could affect skin growth and also impair hearing by disturbing the conversion of sound waves to nerve impulses. Learn more about the gene associated with Bart-Pumphrey syndrome GJB2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition. Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Other Names for This Condition Knuckle pads, deafness, and leukonychia syndrome Knuckle pads, leukonychia, and sensorineural deafness Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Knuckle pads, deafness AND leukonychia syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Knuckle pads-leukonychia-sensorineural deafness-palmoplantar hyperkeratosis syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM BART-PUMPHREY SYNDROME; BAPS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Alexandrino F, Sartorato EL, Marques-de-Faria AP, Steiner CE. G59S mutation in
the GJB2 (connexin 26) gene in a patient with Bart-Pumphrey syndrome. Am J Med
Genet A. 2005 Jul 30;136(3):282-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30822. No abstract
available. Citation on PubMed Lee JR, White TW. Connexin-26 mutations in deafness and skin disease. Expert
Rev Mol Med. 2009 Nov 19;11:e35. doi: 10.1017/S1462399409001276. Citation on PubMed Ramer JC, Vasily DB, Ladda RL. Familial leuconychia, knuckle pads, hearing
loss, and palmoplantar hyperkeratosis: an additional family with Bart-Pumphrey
syndrome. J Med Genet. 1994 Jan;31(1):68-71. doi: 10.1136/jmg.31.1.68. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Richard G, Brown N, Ishida-Yamamoto A, Krol A. Expanding the phenotypic
spectrum of Cx26 disorders: Bart-Pumphrey syndrome is caused by a novel missense
mutation in GJB2. J Invest Dermatol. 2004 Nov;123(5):856-63. doi:
10.1111/j.0022-202X.2004.23470.x. Citation on PubMed Xu J, Nicholson BJ. The role of connexins in ear and skin physiology -
functional insights from disease-associated mutations. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013
Jan;1828(1):167-78. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2012.06.024. Epub 2012 Jul 13. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Hearing Disorders and Deafness Skin Conditions MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Nail abnormalities Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated November 1, 2012