Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/spinocerebellar-ataxia-type-6/ Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (SCA6) is a condition characterized by progressive problems with movement. People with this condition initially experience problems with coordination and balance (ataxia). Other early signs and symptoms of SCA6 include speech difficulties, involuntary eye movements (nystagmus), and double vision. Over time, individuals with SCA6 may develop loss of coordination in their arms, tremors, and uncontrolled muscle tensing (dystonia). Signs and symptoms of SCA6 typically begin in a person's forties or fifties but can appear anytime from childhood to late adulthood. People with this disorder may require walking or mobility assistance later in life. Frequency The worldwide prevalence of SCA6 is estimated to be less than 1 in 100,000 individuals. Causes Variants (also known as mutations) in the CACNA1A gene cause SCA6. The CACNA1A gene provides instructions for making a protein that forms a part of some calcium channels . These channels transport positively charged calcium atoms (calcium ions) across cell membranes. The movement of these ions is critical for normal signaling between nerve cells ( neurons ) in the brain and other parts of the nervous system. The CACNA1A gene provides instructions for making one part (the alpha-1 subunit) of a calcium channel called CaV2.1. CaV2.1 channels play an essential role in communication between neurons in the brain. The CACNA1A gene variants that cause SCA6 involve a DNA segment known as a CAG trinucleotide repeat . This segment is made up of a series of three DNA building blocks (cytosine, adenine, and guanine) that appear multiple times in a row. Normally, the CAG segment is repeated 4 to 18 times within the gene. In people with SCA6, the CAG segment is repeated 20 to 33 times. People with 20 repeats tend to experience signs and symptoms of SCA6 beginning in late adulthood, while people with a larger number of repeats usually have signs and symptoms from mid-adulthood. An increase in the length of the CAG segment leads to the production of an abnormally long version of the alpha-1 subunit. This version of the subunit alters the location and function of the CaV2.1 channels. Normally the alpha-1 subunit is located within the cell membrane; the abnormal subunit is found in the cell membrane as well as in the fluid inside cells ( cytoplasm ), where it clusters together and forms clumps (aggregates). The effect these aggregates have on cell functioning is unknown. The lack of normal calcium channels in the cell membrane impairs cell communication between neurons in the brain. Diminished cell communication leads to cell death. Cells within the cerebellum , which is the part of the brain that coordinates movement, are particularly sensitive to the accumulation of these aggregates. Over time, a loss of cells in the cerebellum causes the movement problems characteristic of SCA6. Learn more about the gene associated with Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 CACNA1A Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition. As the altered CACNA1A gene is passed down from one generation to the next, the length of the CAG trinucleotide repeat often slightly increases. A larger number of repeats is usually associated with an earlier onset of signs and symptoms. This phenomenon is called anticipation. Other Names for This Condition SCA6 Type 6 spinocerebellar ataxia Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA 6; SCA6 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Casey HL, Gomez CM. Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 6. 1998 Oct 23 [updated 2019
Nov 21]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A,
editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of
Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1140/ Citation on PubMed Ishiguro T, Ishikawa K, Takahashi M, Obayashi M, Amino T, Sato N, Sakamoto M,
Fujigasaki H, Tsuruta F, Dolmetsch R, Arai T, Sasaki H, Nagashima K, Kato T,
Yamada M, Takahashi H, Hashizume Y, Mizusawa H. The carboxy-terminal fragment of
alpha(1A) calcium channel preferentially aggregates in the cytoplasm of human
spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 Purkinje cells. Acta Neuropathol. 2010
Apr;119(4):447-64. doi: 10.1007/s00401-009-0630-0. Epub 2009 Dec 31. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Kordasiewicz HB, Gomez CM. Molecular pathogenesis of spinocerebellar ataxia
type 6. Neurotherapeutics. 2007 Apr;4(2):285-94. doi: 10.1016/j.nurt.2007.01.003. Citation on PubMed Rajakulendran S, Schorge S, Kullmann DM, Hanna MG. Dysfunction of the Ca(V)2.1
calcium channel in cerebellar ataxias. F1000 Biol Rep. 2010 Jan 18;2:4. doi:
10.3410/B2-4. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Balance Problems Cerebellar Disorders Genetic Disorders Movement Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Movement - uncoordinated Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated July 29, 2022