Mucopolysaccharidosis type VII: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Mucopolysaccharidosis type VII URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/mucopolysaccharidosis-type-vii/ Mucopolysaccharidosis type VII To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Mucopolysaccharidosis type VII (MPS VII), also known as Sly syndrome, is a progressive condition that affects most tissues and organs. The severity of MPS VII varies widely among affected individuals. The most severe cases of MPS VII are characterized by hydrops fetalis, a condition in which excess fluid builds up in the body before birth. Most babies with hydrops fetalis are stillborn or die soon after birth. Other people with MPS VII typically begin to show signs and symptoms of the condition during early childhood. The features of MPS VII include a large head ( macrocephaly ), a buildup of fluid in the brain (hydrocephalus), distinctive-looking facial features that are described as " coarse ," and a large tongue ( macroglossia ). Affected individuals also frequently develop an enlarged liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly), heart valve abnormalities, and a soft out-pouching around the belly-button (umbilical hernia ) or lower abdomen (inguinal hernia). The airway may become narrow in some people with MPS VII, leading to frequent upper respiratory infections and short pauses in breathing during sleep (sleep apnea). The clear covering of the eye ( cornea ) becomes cloudy, which can cause significant vision loss. People with MPS VII may also have recurrent ear infections and hearing loss. Affected individuals may have developmental delay and progressive intellectual disability, although intelligence is unaffected in some people with this condition. MPS VII causes various skeletal abnormalities that become more pronounced with age, including short stature and joint deformities (contractures) that affect mobility. Individuals with this condition may also have dysostosis multiplex, which refers to multiple skeletal abnormalities seen on x-ray. Carpal tunnel syndrome develops in many children with MPS VII and is characterized by numbness, tingling, and weakness in the hands and fingers. People with MPS VII may develop a narrowing of the spinal canal ( spinal stenosis ) in the neck, which can compress and damage the spinal cord. The life expectancy of individuals with MPS VII depends on the severity of symptoms. Some affected individuals do not survive infancy, while others may live into adolescence or adulthood. Heart disease and airway obstruction are major causes of death in people with MPS VII. Frequency The exact incidence of MPS VII is unknown, although it is estimated to occur in 1 in 250,000 newborns. It is one of the rarest types of mucopolysaccharidosis. Causes Mutations in the GUSB gene cause MPS VII. This gene provides instructions for producing the beta-glucuronidase (β-glucuronidase) enzyme, which is involved in the breakdown of large sugar molecules called glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). GAGs were originally called mucopolysaccharides, which is where this condition gets its name. Mutations in the GUSB gene reduce or completely eliminate the function of β-glucuronidase. The shortage (deficiency) of β-glucuronidase leads to the accumulation of GAGs within cells, specifically inside the lysosomes . Lysosomes are compartments in the cell that digest and recycle different types of molecules. Conditions such as MPS VII that cause molecules to build up inside the lysosomes are called lysosomal storage disorders. The accumulation of GAGs increases the size of the lysosomes, which is why many tissues and organs are enlarged in this disorder. Researchers believe that the GAGs may also interfere with the functions of other proteins inside the lysosomes and disrupt many normal functions of cells. Learn more about the gene associated with Mucopolysaccharidosis type VII GUSB Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Beta-glucuronidase deficiency GUSB deficiency MPS VII MPS7 Mucopolysaccharidosis 7 Mucopolysaccharidosis VII Sly Syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Mucopolysaccharidosis type 7 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Mucopolysaccharidosis type 7 Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS, TYPE VII; MPS7 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Metcalf JA, Zhang Y, Hilton MJ, Long F, Ponder KP. Mechanism of shortened
bones in mucopolysaccharidosis VII. Mol Genet Metab. 2009 Jul;97(3):202-11. doi:
10.1016/j.ymgme.2009.03.005. Epub 2009 Mar 25. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Muenzer J. The mucopolysaccharidoses: a heterogeneous group of disorders with
variable pediatric presentations. J Pediatr. 2004 May;144(5 Suppl):S27-34. doi:
10.1016/j.jpeds.2004.01.052. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Tomatsu S, Montano AM, Dung VC, Grubb JH, Sly WS. Mutations and polymorphisms
in GUSB gene in mucopolysaccharidosis VII (Sly Syndrome). Hum Mutat. 2009
Apr;30(4):511-9. doi: 10.1002/humu.20828. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Venkat-Raman N, Sebire NJ, Murphy KW. Recurrent fetal hydrops due to
mucopolysaccharidoses type VII. Fetal Diagn Ther. 2006;21(3):250-4. doi:
10.1159/000091350. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Carbohydrate Metabolism Disorders Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Mucopolysaccharides Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2010