Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/pulmonary-veno-occlusive-disease/ Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease (PVOD) is characterized by the blockage (occlusion) of the blood vessels that carry oxygen-rich (oxygenated) blood from the lungs to the heart (the pulmonary veins). The occlusion is caused by a buildup of abnormal fibrous tissue in the small veins in the lungs , which narrows the vessels and impairs blood flow. Because blood flow through the lungs is difficult, pressure rises in the vessels that carry blood that needs to be oxygenated to the lungs from the heart ( the pulmonary arteries ). Increased pressure in these vessels is known as pulmonary arterial hypertension . The problems with blood flow in PVOD also impair the delivery of oxygenated blood to the rest of the body, which leads to the signs and symptoms of the condition. Shortness of breath (dyspnea) and tiredness (fatigue) during exertion are the most common symptoms of this condition. Other common features include dizziness, a lack of energy (lethargy), difficulty breathing when lying down, and a cough that does not go away. As the condition worsens, affected individuals can develop a bluish tint to the skin (cyanosis), chest pains, fainting spells, and an accumulation of fluid in the lungs ( pulmonary edema ). Certain features commonly seen in people with PVOD can be identified using a test called a CT scan. One of these features, which is seen in the lungs of affected individuals, is an abnormality described as centrilobular ground-glass opacities. Affected individuals also have abnormal thickening of certain tissues in the lungs, which is described as septal lines. In addition, lymph nodes in the chest (mediastinal lymph nodes) are abnormally enlarged in people with PVOD. PVOD can begin at any age, and the blood flow problems worsen over time. Because of the increased blood pressure in the pulmonary arteries, the heart must work harder than normal to pump blood to the lungs, which can eventually lead to fatal heart failure. Most people with this severe disorder do not live more than 2 years after diagnosis. Frequency The exact prevalence of PVOD is unknown. Many cases are likely misdiagnosed as idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension , which is increased blood pressure in the pulmonary arteries without a known cause. Research suggests that 5 to 25 percent of people diagnosed with idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension have PVOD. Based on these numbers, PVOD is thought to affect an estimated 1 to 2 per 10 million people. Causes The primary genetic cause of PVOD is mutations in the EIF2AK4 gene. Mutations in other genes may cause a small percentage of cases. Other suspected causes of PVOD include viral infection and exposure to toxic chemicals, including certain chemotherapy drugs. The protein produced from the EIF2AK4 gene helps cells respond appropriately to changes that could damage the cell. For example, when the level of protein building blocks ( amino acids ) in a cell falls too low, the activity of the EIF2AK4 protein helps reduce the production of other proteins, which conserves amino acids. The EIF2AK4 gene mutations involved in PVOD likely eliminate functional EIF2AK4 protein; however, it is unknown how absence of this protein's function leads to the pulmonary vessel abnormalities that underlie PVOD. Learn more about the genes associated with Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease BMPR2 EIF2AK4 Inheritance When caused by mutations in the EIF2AK4 gene, PVOD is inherited in an a utosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. In contrast, when caused by mutations in another gene, the condition can have an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In these cases, one parent of an affected individual typically has increased blood pressure in the vessels of the lungs. Other Names for This Condition Isolated pulmonary venous sclerosis Obstructive disease of the pulmonary veins Pulmonary venoocclusive disease PVOD Venous form of primary pulmonary hypertension Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Pulmonary venoocclusive disease 1 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Pulmonary venoocclusive disease Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PULMONARY VENOOCCLUSIVE DISEASE 2, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE; PVOD2 PULMONARY VENOOCCLUSIVE DISEASE 1, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT; PVOD1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Eyries M, Montani D, Girerd B, Perret C, Leroy A, Lonjou C, Chelghoum N,
Coulet F, Bonnet D, Dorfmuller P, Fadel E, Sitbon O, Simonneau G, Tregouet DA,
Humbert M, Soubrier F. EIF2AK4 mutations cause pulmonary veno-occlusive disease,
a recessive form of pulmonary hypertension. Nat Genet. 2014 Jan;46(1):65-9. doi:
10.1038/ng.2844. Epub 2013 Dec 1. Citation on PubMed Mandel J, Mark EJ, Hales CA. Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med. 2000 Nov;162(5):1964-73. doi: 10.1164/ajrccm.162.5.9912045. No
abstract available. Citation on PubMed Montani D, Achouh L, Dorfmuller P, Le Pavec J, Sztrymf B, Tcherakian C,
Rabiller A, Haque R, Sitbon O, Jais X, Dartevelle P, Maitre S, Capron F, Musset
D, Simonneau G, Humbert M. Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease: clinical,
functional, radiologic, and hemodynamic characteristics and outcome of 24 cases
confirmed by histology. Medicine (Baltimore). 2008 Jul;87(4):220-233. doi:
10.1097/MD.0b013e31818193bb. Citation on PubMed Runo JR, Vnencak-Jones CL, Prince M, Loyd JE, Wheeler L, Robbins IM, Lane KB,
Newman JH, Johnson J, Nichols WC, Phillips JA 3rd. Pulmonary veno-occlusive
disease caused by an inherited mutation in bone morphogenetic protein receptor
II. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2003 Mar 15;167(6):889-94. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200208-861OC. Epub 2002 Nov 21. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Pulmonary Hypertension MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Pulmonary hypertension Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 1, 2015