Lattice corneal dystrophy type I: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Lattice corneal dystrophy type I URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/lattice-corneal-dystrophy-type-i/ Lattice corneal dystrophy type I To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Lattice corneal dystrophy type I is an eye disorder that affects the clear, outer covering of the eye called the cornea. The cornea must remain clear for an individual to see properly; however, in lattice corneal dystrophy type I, protein clumps known as amyloid deposits cloud the cornea, which leads to vision impairment. The cornea is made up of several layers of tissue, and in lattice corneal dystrophy type I, the deposits form in the stromal layer. The amyloid deposits form as delicate, branching fibers that create a lattice pattern. Affected individuals often have recurrent corneal erosions, which are caused by separation of particular layers of the cornea from one another. Corneal erosions are very painful and can cause sensitivity to bright light (photophobia). Lattice corneal dystrophy type I is usually bilateral, which means it affects both eyes. The condition becomes apparent in childhood or adolescence and leads to vision problems by early adulthood. Frequency Lattice corneal dystrophy type I is one of the most common disorders in a group of conditions that are characterized by protein deposits in the cornea (corneal dystrophies); however, it is still a rare condition. The prevalence of lattice corneal dystrophy type I is unknown. Causes Lattice corneal dystrophy type I is caused by mutations in the TGFBI gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is found in many tissues throughout the body, including the cornea. The TGFBI protein is part of the extracellular matrix, an intricate network that forms in the spaces between cells and provides structural support to tissues. The protein is thought to play a role in the attachment of cells to one another (cell adhesion) and cell movement (migration). The TGFBI gene mutations involved in lattice corneal dystrophy type I change single protein building blocks ( amino acids ) in the TGFBI protein. Mutated TGFBI proteins abnormally clump together and form amyloid deposits. However, it is unclear how the changes caused by the gene mutations induce the protein to form deposits. Learn more about the gene associated with Lattice corneal dystrophy type I TGFBI Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition. Other Names for This Condition Biber-Haab-Dimmer dystrophy Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Lattice corneal dystrophy Type I Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Lattice corneal dystrophy type I Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CORNEAL DYSTROPHY, LATTICE TYPE I; CDL1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Kannabiran C, Klintworth GK. TGFBI gene mutations in corneal dystrophies. Hum
Mutat. 2006 Jul;27(7):615-25. doi: 10.1002/humu.20334. Citation on PubMed Klintworth GK. Corneal dystrophies. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2009 Feb 23;4:7. doi:
10.1186/1750-1172-4-7. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Liu Z, Wang YQ, Gong QH, Xie LX. An R124C mutation in TGFBI caused lattice
corneal dystrophy type I with a variable phenotype in three Chinese families. Mol
Vis. 2008 Jun 30;14:1234-9. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Munier FL, Korvatska E, Djemai A, Le Paslier D, Zografos L, Pescia G,
Schorderet DF. Kerato-epithelin mutations in four 5q31-linked corneal
dystrophies. Nat Genet. 1997 Mar;15(3):247-51. doi: 10.1038/ng0397-247. Citation on PubMed Schmitt-Bernard CF, Chavanieu A, Derancourt J, Arnaud B, Demaille JG, Calas B,
Argiles A. In vitro creation of amyloid fibrils from native and Arg124Cys mutated
betaIGH3((110-131)) peptides, and its relevance for lattice corneal amyloid
dystrophy type I. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Jul 5;273(2):649-53. doi:
10.1006/bbrc.2000.2955. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Corneal Disorders Eye Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Cloudy cornea Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated April 1, 2012