Cold-induced sweating syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Cold-induced sweating syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/cold-induced-sweating-syndrome/ Cold-induced sweating syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Cold-induced sweating syndrome is characterized by problems with regulating body temperature and other abnormalities affecting many parts of the body. In infancy, the features of this condition are often known as Crisponi syndrome. Researchers originally thought that cold-induced sweating syndrome and Crisponi syndrome were separate disorders, but it is now widely believed that they represent the same condition at different times during life. Infants with Crisponi syndrome have unusual facial features, including a flat nasal bridge , upturned nostrils, a long space between the nose and upper lip ( philtrum ), a high arched roof of the mouth (palate) , a small chin ( micrognathia ), and low-set ears. The muscles in the lower part of the face are weak, leading to severe feeding difficulties, excessive drooling, and breathing problems. Other physical abnormalities associated with Crisponi syndrome include a scaly skin rash, an inability to fully extend the elbows, overlapping fingers and tightly fisted hands , and malformations of the feet and toes. Affected infants startle easily and often tense their facial muscles into a grimace-like expression . By six months of age, infants with Crisponi syndrome develop unexplained high fevers that increase the risk of seizures and sudden death. Many of the health problems associated with Crisponi syndrome improve with time, and affected individuals who survive the newborn period go on to develop other features of cold-induced sweating syndrome in early childhood. Within the first decade of life, affected individuals begin having episodes of profuse sweating (hyperhidrosis) and shivering involving the face, torso, and arms. The excessive sweating is usually triggered by exposure to temperatures below about 65 or 70 degrees Fahrenheit, but it can also be triggered by nervousness or eating sugary foods. Paradoxically, affected individuals tend not to sweat in warmer conditions, instead becoming flushed and overheated in hot environments. Adolescents with cold-induced sweating syndrome typically develop abnormal side-to-side and front-to-back curvature of the spine ( scoliosis and kyphosis , often called kyphoscoliosis when they occur together). Although infants may develop life-threatening fevers, affected individuals who survive infancy have a normal life expectancy. Frequency Cold-induced sweating syndrome is a rare condition; its prevalence is unknown. The condition was first identified in the Sardinian population, but it has since been reported in regions worldwide. Causes About 90 percent of cases of cold-induced sweating syndrome and Crisponi syndrome result from mutations in the CRLF1 gene. These cases are designated as CISS1. The remaining 10 percent of cases are caused by mutations in the CLCF1 gene and are designated as CISS2. The proteins produced from the CRLF1 and CLCF1 genes work together as part of a signaling pathway that is involved in the normal development of the nervous system. This pathway appears to be particularly important for the development and maintenance of motor neurons , which are nerve cells that control muscle movement. Studies suggest that this pathway also has a role in a part of the nervous system known as the sympathetic nervous system, specifically in the regulation of sweating in response to temperature changes and other factors. The proteins produced from the CRLF1 and CLCF1 genes appear to be critical for the normal development and maturation of nerve cells that control the activity of sweat glands. Additionally, the CRLF1 and CLCF1 genes likely have functions outside the nervous system, including roles in the body's inflammatory response and in bone development. However, little is known about their involvement in these processes. Mutations in either the CRLF1 or CLCF1 gene disrupt the normal development of several body systems, including the nervous system. The role of these genes in sympathetic nervous system development may help explain the abnormal sweating that is characteristic of this condition, including unusual sweating patterns and related problems with body temperature regulation. The involvement of these genes in motor neuron development and bone development provides clues to some of the other signs and symptoms of cold-induced sweating syndrome, including distinctive facial features, facial muscle weakness, and skeletal abnormalities. However, little is known about how CRLF1 or CLCF1 gene mutations underlie these other features of cold-induced sweating syndrome. Learn more about the genes associated with Cold-induced sweating syndrome CLCF1 CRLF1 Inheritance Cold-induced sweating syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the CRLF1 or CLCF1 gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition CISS CNTF receptor-related disorders Crisponi syndrome Sohar-Crisponi syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Cold-induced sweating syndrome Genetic Testing Registry: Cold-induced sweating syndrome 1 Genetic Testing Registry: Cold-induced sweating syndrome 2 Genetic Testing Registry: PERCHING syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CRISPONI/COLD-INDUCED SWEATING SYNDROME 1; CISS1 CRISPONI/COLD-INDUCED SWEATING SYNDROME 2; CISS2 PERCHING SYNDROME; PERCHING Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Angius A, Uva P, Buers I, Oppo M, Puddu A, Onano S, Persico I, Loi A, Marcia
L, Hohne W, Cuccuru G, Fotia G, Deiana M, Marongiu M, Atalay HT, Inan S, El Assy
O, Smit LM, Okur I, Boduroglu K, Utine GE, Kilic E, Zampino G, Crisponi G,
Crisponi L, Rutsch F. Bi-allelic Mutations in KLHL7 Cause a Crisponi/CISS1-like
Phenotype Associated with Early-Onset Retinitis Pigmentosa. Am J Hum Genet. 2016
Jul 7;99(1):236-45. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.05.026. Erratum In: Am J Hum Genet.
2018 Apr 5;102(4):713. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.03.020. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Crisponi G. Autosomal recessive disorder with muscle contractions resembling
neonatal tetanus, characteristic face, camptodactyly, hyperthermia, and sudden
death: a new syndrome? Am J Med Genet. 1996 Apr 24;62(4):365-71. doi:
10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19960424)62:43.0.CO;2-Q. Citation on PubMed Crisponi L, Crisponi G, Meloni A, Toliat MR, Nurnberg G, Usala G, Uda M,
Masala M, Hohne W, Becker C, Marongiu M, Chiappe F, Kleta R, Rauch A, Wollnik B,
Strasser F, Reese T, Jakobs C, Kurlemann G, Cao A, Nurnberg P, Rutsch F. Crisponi
syndrome is caused by mutations in the CRLF1 gene and is allelic to cold-induced
sweating syndrome type 1. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 May;80(5):971-81. doi:
10.1086/516843. Epub 2007 Mar 30. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Dagoneau N, Bellais S, Blanchet P, Sarda P, Al-Gazali LI, Di Rocco M, Huber C,
Djouadi F, Le Goff C, Munnich A, Cormier-Daire V. Mutations in cytokine
receptor-like factor 1 (CRLF1) account for both Crisponi and cold-induced
sweating syndromes. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 May;80(5):966-70. doi: 10.1086/513608.
Epub 2007 Mar 13. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Hahn AF, Jones DL, Knappskog PM, Boman H, McLeod JG. Cold-induced sweating
syndrome: a report of two cases and demonstration of genetic heterogeneity. J
Neurol Sci. 2006 Dec 1;250(1-2):62-70. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2006.07.001. Epub 2006
Sep 6. Citation on PubMed Hahn AF, Knappskog PM. Cold-Induced Sweating Syndrome Including Crisponi
Syndrome. 2011 Mar 3 [updated 2021 Aug 12]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM,
Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK52917/ Citation on PubMed Hahn AF, Waaler PE, Kvistad PH, Bamforth JS, Miles JH, McLeod JG, Knappskog
PM, Boman H. Cold-induced sweating syndrome: CISS1 and CISS2: manifestations from
infancy to adulthood. Four new cases. J Neurol Sci. 2010 Jun 15;293(1-2):68-75.
doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2010.02.028. Epub 2010 Apr 18. Citation on PubMed Knappskog PM, Majewski J, Livneh A, Nilsen PT, Bringsli JS, Ott J, Boman H.
Cold-induced sweating syndrome is caused by mutations in the CRLF1 gene. Am J Hum
Genet. 2003 Feb;72(2):375-83. doi: 10.1086/346120. Epub 2002 Dec 31. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Rousseau F, Gauchat JF, McLeod JG, Chevalier S, Guillet C, Guilhot F, Cognet
I, Froger J, Hahn AF, Knappskog PM, Gascan H, Boman H. Inactivation of
cardiotrophin-like cytokine, a second ligand for ciliary neurotrophic factor
receptor, leads to cold-induced sweating syndrome in a patient. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2006 Jun 27;103(26):10068-73. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0509598103. Epub 2006
Jun 16. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Autonomic Nervous System Disorders Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Kyphosis Scoliosis Sweating Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2012