Potocki-Shaffer syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Potocki-Shaffer syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/potocki-shaffer-syndrome/ Potocki-Shaffer syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Potocki-Shaffer syndrome is a disorder that affects development of the bones, nerve cells in the brain, and other tissues. Most people with this condition have multiple noncancerous (benign) bone tumors called osteochondromas. In rare instances, these tumors become cancerous. People with Potocki-Shaffer syndrome also have enlarged openings in the two bones that make up much of the top and sides of the skull ( enlarged parietal foramina ). These abnormal openings form extra "soft spots" on the head, in addition to the two that newborns normally have. Unlike the usual newborn soft spots, the enlarged parietal foramina remain open throughout life. The signs and symptoms of Potocki-Shaffer syndrome vary widely. In addition to multiple osteochondromas and enlarged parietal foramina, affected individuals often have intellectual disability and delayed development of speech, motor skills (such as sitting and walking), and social skills. Many people with this condition have distinctive facial features, which can include a wide, short skull ( brachycephaly ); a prominent forehead ; a narrow bridge of the nose ; a shortened distance between the nose and upper lip (a short philtrum); and a downturned mouth. Less commonly, Potocki-Shaffer syndrome causes vision problems, additional skeletal abnormalities, and defects in the heart, kidneys, and urinary tract . Frequency Potocki-Shaffer syndrome is a rare condition, although its prevalence is unknown. Fewer than 100 cases have been reported in the scientific literature. Causes Potocki-Shaffer syndrome (also known as proximal 11p deletion syndrome) is caused by a deletion of genetic material from the short (p) arm of chromosome 11 at a position designated 11p11.2. The size of the deletion varies among affected individuals. Studies suggest that the full spectrum of features is caused by a deletion of at least 2.1 million DNA building blocks (base pairs), also written as 2.1 megabases (Mb). The loss of multiple genes within the deleted region causes the varied signs and symptoms of Potocki-Shaffer syndrome. In particular, deletion of the EXT2 , ALX4 , and PHF21A genes are associated with several of the characteristic features of Potocki-Shaffer syndrome. Research shows that loss of the EXT2 gene is associated with the development of multiple osteochondromas in affected individuals. Deletion of another gene, ALX4 , causes the enlarged parietal foramina found in people with this condition. In addition, loss of the PHF21A gene is the cause of intellectual disability and distinctive facial features in many people with the condition. The loss of additional genes in the deleted region likely contributes to the other features of Potocki-Shaffer syndrome. Learn more about the genes and chromosome associated with Potocki-Shaffer syndrome ALX4 EXT2 PHF21A chromosome 11 Inheritance Potocki-Shaffer syndrome follows an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern, which means a deletion of genetic material from one copy of chromosome 11 is sufficient to cause the disorder. In some cases, an affected person inherits the chromosome with a deleted segment from an affected parent . More commonly, the condition results from a deletion that occurs during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs and sperm) in a parent or in early fetal development. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Other Names for This Condition Chromosome 11p11.2 deletion syndrome P11pDS Proximal 11p deletion syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Potocki-Shaffer syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Potocki-Shaffer syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM POTOCKI-SHAFFER SYNDROME Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Hall CR, Wu Y, Shaffer LG, Hecht JT. Familial case of Potocki-Shaffer syndrome
associated with microdeletion of EXT2 and ALX4. Clin Genet. 2001 Nov;60(5):356-9.
doi: 10.1034/j.1399-0004.2001.600506.x. Citation on PubMed Kim HG, Kim HT, Leach NT, Lan F, Ullmann R, Silahtaroglu A, Kurth I, Nowka A,
Seong IS, Shen Y, Talkowski ME, Ruderfer D, Lee JH, Glotzbach C, Ha K, Kjaergaard
S, Levin AV, Romeike BF, Kleefstra T, Bartsch O, Elsea SH, Jabs EW, MacDonald ME,
Harris DJ, Quade BJ, Ropers HH, Shaffer LG, Kutsche K, Layman LC, Tommerup N,
Kalscheuer VM, Shi Y, Morton CC, Kim CH, Gusella JF. Translocations disrupting
PHF21A in the Potocki-Shaffer-syndrome region are associated with intellectual
disability and craniofacial anomalies. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Jul 13;91(1):56-72.
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.05.005. Epub 2012 Jul 5. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Montgomery ND, Turcott CM, Tepperberg JH, McDonald MT, Aylsworth AS. A 137-kb
deletion within the Potocki-Shaffer syndrome interval on chromosome 11p11.2
associated with developmental delay and hypotonia. Am J Med Genet A. 2013
Jan;161A(1):198-202. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35671. Epub 2012 Dec 13. Citation on PubMed Romeike BF, Wuyts W. Proximal chromosome 11p contiguous gene deletion syndrome
phenotype: case report and review of the literature. Clin Neuropathol. 2007
Jan-Feb;26(1):1-11. doi: 10.5414/npp26001. Citation on PubMed Swarr DT, Bloom D, Lewis RA, Elenberg E, Friedman EM, Glotzbach C, Wissman SD,
Shaffer LG, Potocki L. Potocki-Shaffer syndrome: comprehensive clinical
assessment, review of the literature, and proposals for medical management. Am J
Med Genet A. 2010 Mar;152A(3):565-72. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33245. Citation on PubMed Wakui K, Gregato G, Ballif BC, Glotzbach CD, Bailey KA, Kuo PL, Sue WC,
Sheffield LJ, Irons M, Gomez EG, Hecht JT, Potocki L, Shaffer LG. Construction of
a natural panel of 11p11.2 deletions and further delineation of the critical
region involved in Potocki-Shaffer syndrome. Eur J Hum Genet. 2005
May;13(5):528-40. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201366. Citation on PubMed Wuyts W, Waeber G, Meinecke P, Schuler H, Goecke TO, Van Hul W, Bartsch O.
Proximal 11p deletion syndrome (P11pDS): additional evaluation of the clinical
and molecular aspects. Eur J Hum Genet. 2004 May;12(5):400-6. doi:
10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201163. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Benign Tumors Bone Diseases Craniofacial Abnormalities Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Chromosome Genetics Skull of a Newborn (Image) Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated May 1, 2016