Thanatophoric dysplasia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Thanatophoric dysplasia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/thanatophoric-dysplasia/ Thanatophoric dysplasia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Thanatophoric dysplasia is a severe skeletal disorder characterized by extremely short limbs and folds of extra (redundant) skin on the arms and legs.  Other features of this condition include a narrow chest, short ribs, underdeveloped lungs, and an enlarged head with a large forehead and prominent, wide-spaced eyes . Researchers have described two major forms of thanatophoric dysplasia, type I and type II.  Type I thanatophoric dysplasia is distinguished by the presence of curved thigh bones and flattened bones of the spine (platyspondyly).  Type II thanatophoric dysplasia is characterized by straight thigh bones and a moderate to severe skull abnormality called a cloverleaf skull . The term thanatophoric is Greek for "death bearing."  Infants with thanatophoric dysplasia are usually stillborn or die shortly after birth from respiratory failure; however, a few affected individuals have survived into childhood with extensive medical help. Frequency This condition occurs in 1 in 20,000 to 50,000 newborns.  Type I thanatophoric dysplasia is more common than type II. Causes Mutations in the FGFR3 gene cause thanatophoric dysplasia. Both types of this condition result from mutations in the FGFR3 gene.  This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is involved in the development and maintenance of bone and brain tissue.  Mutations in this gene cause the FGFR3 protein to be overly active, which leads to the severe disturbances in bone growth that are characteristic of thanatophoric dysplasia. It is not known how FGFR3 mutations cause the brain and skin abnormalities associated with this disorder. Learn more about the gene associated with Thanatophoric dysplasia FGFR3 Inheritance Thanatophoric dysplasia is considered an autosomal dominant disorder because one mutated copy of the FGFR3 gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition.  Virtually all cases of thanatophoric dysplasia are caused by new mutations in the FGFR3 gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.  No affected individuals are known to have had children; therefore, the disorder has not been passed to the next generation. Other Names for This Condition Dwarf, thanatophoric Thanatophoric dwarfism Thanatophoric short stature Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Thanatophoric dysplasia type 1 Genetic Testing Registry: Thanatophoric dysplasia, type 2 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Thanatophoric dysplasia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM THANATOPHORIC DYSPLASIA, TYPE I; TD1 THANATOPHORIC DYSPLASIA, TYPE II; TD2 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Cohen MM Jr. Some chondrodysplasias with short limbs: molecular perspectives.
Am J Med Genet. 2002 Oct 15;112(3):304-13. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.10780. Citation on PubMed Foldynova-Trantirkova S, Wilcox WR, Krejci P. Sixteen years and counting: the
current understanding of fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) signaling in
skeletal dysplasias. Hum Mutat. 2012 Jan;33(1):29-41. doi: 10.1002/humu.21636.
Epub 2011 Nov 16. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central French T, Savarirayan R. Thanatophoric Dysplasia. 2004 May 21 [updated 2023
May 18]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A,
editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of
Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1366/ Citation on PubMed Martinez-Frias ML, de Frutos CA, Bermejo E, Nieto MA; ECEMC Working Group.
Review of the recently defined molecular mechanisms underlying thanatophoric
dysplasia and their potential therapeutic implications for achondroplasia. Am J
Med Genet A. 2010 Jan;152A(1):245-55. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33188. Citation on PubMed Pannier S, Martinovic J, Heuertz S, Delezoide AL, Munnich A, Schibler L, Serre
V, Legeai-Mallet L. Thanatophoric dysplasia caused by double missense FGFR3
mutations. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Jun;149A(6):1296-301. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.32880. Citation on PubMed Vajo Z, Francomano CA, Wilkin DJ. The molecular and genetic basis of
fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 disorders: the achondroplasia family of
skeletal dysplasias, Muenke craniosynostosis, and Crouzon syndrome with
acanthosis nigricans. Endocr Rev. 2000 Feb;21(1):23-39. doi:
10.1210/edrv.21.1.0387. Citation on PubMed Waller DK, Correa A, Vo TM, Wang Y, Hobbs C, Langlois PH, Pearson K, Romitti
PA, Shaw GM, Hecht JT. The population-based prevalence of achondroplasia and
thanatophoric dysplasia in selected regions of the US. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Sep
15;146A(18):2385-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32485. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Craniofacial Abnormalities Dwarfism Genetic Disorders Respiratory Failure MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated October 1, 2012