Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1 URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/spinal-muscular-atrophy-with-respiratory-distress-type-1/ Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1 (SMARD1) is an inherited condition that causes muscle weakness and respiratory failure typically beginning in infancy. Early features of this condition are difficult and noisy breathing, especially when inhaling; a weak cry; problems feeding; and recurrent episodes of pneumonia. Typically between the ages of 6 weeks and 6 months, infants with this condition will experience a sudden inability to breathe due to paralysis of the muscle that separates the abdomen from the chest cavity (the diaphragm). Normally, the diaphragm contracts and moves downward during inhalation to allow the lungs to expand. With diaphragm paralysis, affected individuals require life-long support with a machine to help them breathe (mechanical ventilation). Rarely, children with SMARD1 develop signs or symptoms of the disorder later in childhood. Soon after respiratory failure occurs, individuals with SMARD1 develop muscle weakness in their distal muscles. These are the muscles farther from the center of the body, such as muscles in the hands and feet. The weakness soon spreads to all muscles; however, within 2 years, the muscle weakness typically stops getting worse. Some individuals may retain a low level of muscle function, while others lose all ability to move their muscles.  Muscle weakness severely impairs motor development, such as sitting, standing, and walking. Some affected children develop an abnormal side-to-side and back-to-front curvature of the spine ( scoliosis and kyphosis , often called kyphoscoliosis when they occur together). After approximately the first year of life, individuals with SMARD1 may lose their deep tendon reflexes, such as the reflex being tested when a doctor taps the knee with a hammer. Other features of SMARD1 can include reduced pain sensitivity, excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis), loss of bladder and bowel control, and an irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia). Frequency SMARD1 appears to be a rare condition, but its prevalence is unknown. More than 60 cases have been reported in the scientific literature. Causes Mutations in the IGHMBP2 gene cause SMARD1. The IGHMBP2 gene provides instructions for making a protein involved in copying (replicating) DNA ; producing RNA, a chemical cousin of DNA; and producing proteins. IGHMBP2 gene mutations that cause SMARD1 lead to the production of a protein with reduced ability to aid in DNA replication and the production of RNA and proteins. These problems particularly affect alpha-motor neurons , which are specialized cells in the brainstem and spinal cord that control muscle movements. Although the mechanism is unknown, altered IGHMBP2 proteins contribute to the damage of these neurons and their death over time. The cumulative death of alpha-motor neurons leads to breathing problems and progressive muscle weakness in children with SMARD1. Research suggests that the amount of functional protein that is produced from the mutated IGHMBP2 gene may play a role in the severity of SMARD1. Individuals who have some functional protein are more likely to develop signs and symptoms later in childhood and retain a greater level of muscle function. Learn more about the gene associated with Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1 IGHMBP2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Autosomal recessive distal spinal muscular atrophy 1 DHMN6 Diaphragmatic spinal muscular atrophy Distal hereditary motor neuronopathy type VI Distal spinal muscular atrophy type 1 DSMA1 HMN6 HMNVI Severe infantile axonal neuropathy with respiratory failure SIANRF SMARD1 Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Autosomal recessive distal spinal muscular atrophy 1 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1 Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM NEURONOPATHY, DISTAL HEREDITARY MOTOR, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1; HMNR1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Eckart M, Guenther UP, Idkowiak J, Varon R, Grolle B, Boffi P, Van Maldergem
L, Hubner C, Schuelke M, von Au K. The natural course of infantile spinal
muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1 (SMARD1). Pediatrics. 2012
Jan;129(1):e148-56. doi: 10.1542/peds.2011-0544. Epub 2011 Dec 12. Citation on PubMed Guenther UP, Handoko L, Varon R, Stephani U, Tsao CY, Mendell JR, Lutzkendorf
S, Hubner C, von Au K, Jablonka S, Dittmar G, Heinemann U, Schuetz A, Schuelke M.
Clinical variability in distal spinal muscular atrophy type 1 (DSMA1):
determination of steady-state IGHMBP2 protein levels in five patients with
infantile and juvenile disease. J Mol Med (Berl). 2009 Jan;87(1):31-41. doi:
10.1007/s00109-008-0402-7. Epub 2008 Sep 18. Citation on PubMed Guenther UP, Varon R, Schlicke M, Dutrannoy V, Volk A, Hubner C, von Au K,
Schuelke M. Clinical and mutational profile in spinal muscular atrophy with
respiratory distress (SMARD): defining novel phenotypes through hierarchical
cluster analysis. Hum Mutat. 2007 Aug;28(8):808-15. doi: 10.1002/humu.20525. Citation on PubMed Kaindl AM, Guenther UP, Rudnik-Schoneborn S, Varon R, Zerres K, Schuelke M,
Hubner C, von Au K. Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1
(SMARD1). J Child Neurol. 2008 Feb;23(2):199-204. doi: 10.1177/0883073807310989. Citation on PubMed van der Pol WL, Talim B, Pitt M, von Au K. 190 th ENMC international workshop:
Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress/distal spinal muscular atrophy
type 1: 11-13 May 2012, Naarden, The Netherlands. Neuromuscul Disord. 2013
Jul;23(7):602-9. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2013.04.004. Epub 2013 May 29. No abstract
available. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Respiratory Failure Spinal Muscular Atrophy MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Diaphragm and Lungs (figure) (Image) Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 1, 2019