ALG1-congenital disorder of glycosylation: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → ALG1-congenital disorder of glycosylation URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/alg1-congenital-disorder-of-glycosylation/ ALG1-congenital disorder of glycosylation To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description ALG1 -congenital disorder of glycosylation ( ALG1 -CDG, also known as congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ik) is an inherited disorder with varying signs and symptoms that typically develop during infancy and can affect several body systems. Individuals with ALG1 -CDG often have intellectual disability, delayed development, and weak muscle tone (hypotonia). Many affected individuals develop seizures that can be difficult to treat. Individuals with ALG1 -CDG may also have movement problems such as involuntary rhythmic shaking (tremor) or difficulties with movement and balance (ataxia). People with ALG1 -CDG often have problems with blood clotting , which can lead to abnormal clotting or bleeding episodes. Additionally, affected individuals may produce abnormally low levels of proteins called antibodies (or immunoglobulins), particularly immunoglobulin G (IgG). Antibodies help protect the body against infection by foreign particles and germs. A reduction in antibodies can make it difficult for affected individuals to fight infections. Some people with ALG1 -CDG have physical abnormalities such as a small head size ( microcephaly ); unusual facial features; joint deformities called contractures; long, slender fingers and toes (arachnodactyly); or unusually fleshy pads at the tips of the fingers and toes. Eye problems that may occur in people with this condition include eyes that do not point in the same direction (strabismus) or involuntary eye movements (nystagmus). Rarely, affected individuals develop vision loss. Less common abnormalities that occur in people with ALG1 -CDG include respiratory problems, reduced sensation in their arms and legs (peripheral neuropathy), swelling ( edema ), and gastrointestinal difficulties. The signs and symptoms of ALG1 -CDG are often severe, with affected individuals surviving only into infancy or childhood. However, some people with this condition are more mildly affected and survive into adulthood. Frequency ALG1 -CDG appears to be a rare disorder; fewer than 30 affected individuals have been described in the scientific literature. Causes Mutations in the ALG1 gene cause ALG1 -CDG. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme that is involved in a process called glycosylation. During this process, complex chains of sugar molecules (oligosaccharides) are added to proteins and fats (lipids). Glycosylation modifies proteins and lipids so they can fully perform their functions. The enzyme produced from the ALG1 gene transfers a simple sugar called mannose to growing oligosaccharides at a particular step in the formation of the sugar chain. Once the correct number of sugar molecules are linked together, the oligosaccharide is attached to a protein or lipid. ALG1 gene mutations lead to the production of an abnormal enzyme with reduced activity. The poorly functioning enzyme cannot add mannose to sugar chains efficiently, and the resulting oligosaccharides are often incomplete. Although the short oligosaccharides can be transferred to proteins and fats, the process is not as efficient as with the full-length oligosaccharide. The wide variety of signs and symptoms in ALG1 -CDG are likely due to impaired glycosylation of proteins and lipids that are needed for normal function of many organs and tissues. Learn more about the gene associated with ALG1-congenital disorder of glycosylation ALG1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition ALG1-CDG Carbohydrate deficient glycoprotein syndrome type Ik CDG1K CDGIk Congenital disorder of glycosylation type 1K Mannosyltransferase 1 deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: ALG1-congenital disorder of glycosylation Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center ALG1-CDG Congenital disorder of glycosylation Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ik; CDG1K Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Dupre T, Vuillaumier-Barrot S, Chantret I, Sadou Yaye H, Le Bizec C, Afenjar
A, Altuzarra C, Barnerias C, Burglen L, de Lonlay P, Feillet F, Napuri S, Seta N,
Moore SE. Guanosine diphosphate-mannose:GlcNAc2-PP-dolichol mannosyltransferase
deficiency (congenital disorders of glycosylation type Ik): five new patients and
seven novel mutations. J Med Genet. 2010 Nov;47(11):729-35. doi:
10.1136/jmg.2009.072504. Epub 2010 Aug 2. Erratum In: J Med Genet. 2015
Mar;52(3):216. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2009-072504corr1.. Yaye, H S [corrected to
Sadou Yaye, H]. Citation on PubMed Jaeken J, Lefeber D, Matthijs G. Clinical utility gene card for: ALG1
defective congenital disorder of glycosylation. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015
Oct;23(10):1431. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.9. Epub 2015 Feb 4. No abstract
available. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Morava E, Vodopiutz J, Lefeber DJ, Janecke AR, Schmidt WM, Lechner S, Item CB,
Sykut-Cegielska J, Adamowicz M, Wierzba J, Zhang ZH, Mihalek I, Stockler S,
Bodamer OA, Lehle L, Wevers RA. Defining the phenotype in congenital disorder of
glycosylation due to ALG1 mutations. Pediatrics. 2012 Oct;130(4):e1034-9. doi:
10.1542/peds.2011-2711. Epub 2012 Sep 10. Citation on PubMed Rohlfing AK, Rust S, Reunert J, Tirre M, Du Chesne I, Wemhoff S, Meinhardt F,
Hartmann H, Das AM, Marquardt T. ALG1-CDG: a new case with early fatal outcome.
Gene. 2014 Jan 25;534(2):345-51. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.10.013. Epub 2013 Oct
21. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Metabolic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Immunodeficiency disorders Movement - uncoordinated Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 1, 2017