Rotor syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Rotor syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/rotor-syndrome/ Rotor syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Rotor syndrome is a relatively mild condition characterized by elevated levels of a substance called bilirubin in the blood (hyperbilirubinemia). Bilirubin is produced when red blood cells are broken down. It has an orange-yellow tint, and buildup of this substance can cause yellowing of the skin or whites of the eyes (jaundice). In people with Rotor syndrome, jaundice is usually evident shortly after birth or in childhood and may come and go; yellowing of the whites of the eyes (also called conjunctival icterus) is often the only symptom. There are two forms of bilirubin in the body: a toxic form called unconjugated bilirubin and a nontoxic form called conjugated bilirubin. People with Rotor syndrome have a buildup of both unconjugated and conjugated bilirubin in their blood, but the majority is conjugated. Frequency Rotor syndrome is a rare condition, although its prevalence is unknown. Causes The SLCO1B1 and SLCO1B3 genes are involved in Rotor syndrome. Mutations in both genes are required for the condition to occur. The SLCO1B1 and SLCO1B3 genes provide instructions for making similar proteins, called organic anion transporting polypeptide 1B1 (OATP1B1) and organic anion transporting polypeptide 1B3 (OATP1B3), respectively. Both proteins are found in liver cells; they transport bilirubin and other compounds from the blood into the liver so that they can be cleared from the body. In the liver, bilirubin is dissolved in a digestive fluid called bile and then excreted from the body. The SLCO1B1 and SLCO1B3 gene mutations that cause Rotor syndrome lead to abnormally short, nonfunctional OATP1B1 and OATP1B3 proteins or an absence of these proteins. Without the function of either transport protein, bilirubin is less efficiently taken up by the liver and removed from the body. The buildup of this substance leads to jaundice in people with Rotor syndrome. Learn more about the genes associated with Rotor syndrome SLCO1B1 SLCO1B3 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern . In autosomal recessive inheritance, both copies of a gene in each cell have mutations. In Rotor syndrome, an affected individual must have mutations in both the SLCO1B1 and the SLCO1B3 gene, so both copies of the two genes are altered. The parents of an individual with this condition each carry one altered copy of both genes, but they do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Hyperbilirubinemia, Rotor type Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Rotor syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Rotor syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, ROTOR TYPE; HBLRR Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Strassburg CP. Hyperbilirubinemia syndromes (Gilbert-Meulengracht,
Crigler-Najjar, Dubin-Johnson, and Rotor syndrome). Best Pract Res Clin
Gastroenterol. 2010 Oct;24(5):555-71. doi: 10.1016/j.bpg.2010.07.007. Citation on PubMed van de Steeg E, Stranecky V, Hartmannova H, Noskova L, Hrebicek M, Wagenaar E,
van Esch A, de Waart DR, Oude Elferink RP, Kenworthy KE, Sticova E, al-Edreesi M,
Knisely AS, Kmoch S, Jirsa M, Schinkel AH. Complete OATP1B1 and OATP1B3
deficiency causes human Rotor syndrome by interrupting conjugated bilirubin
reuptake into the liver. J Clin Invest. 2012 Feb;122(2):519-28. doi:
10.1172/JCI59526. Epub 2012 Jan 9. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Wolkoff AW, Wolpert E, Pascasio FN, Arias IM. Rotor's syndrome. A distinct
inheritable pathophysiologic entity. Am J Med. 1976 Feb;60(2):173-9. doi:
10.1016/0002-9343(76)90426-5. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Jaundice Liver Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Bilirubin blood test Genetics Related Medical Tests Bilirubin Blood Test Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 1, 2013