Meesmann corneal dystrophy: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Meesmann corneal dystrophy URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/meesmann-corneal-dystrophy/ Meesmann corneal dystrophy To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Meesmann corneal dystrophy is an eye disease that affects the cornea, which is the clear front covering of the eye. This condition is characterized by the formation of tiny round cysts in the outermost layer of the cornea, called the corneal epithelium. This part of the cornea acts as a barrier to help prevent foreign materials, such as dust and bacteria, from entering the eye. In people with Meesmann corneal dystrophy, cysts can appear as early as the first year of life. They usually affect both eyes and increase in number over time. The cysts usually do not cause any symptoms until late adolescence or adulthood, when they start to break open (rupture) on the surface of the cornea and cause irritation. The resulting symptoms typically include increased sensitivity to light (photophobia), twitching of the eyelids (blepharospasm), increased tear production, the sensation of having a foreign object in the eye, and an inability to tolerate wearing contact lenses. Some affected individuals also have temporary episodes of blurred vision. Frequency Meesmann corneal dystrophy is a rare disorder whose prevalence is unknown. It was first described in a large, multi-generational German family with more than 100 affected members. Since then, the condition has been reported in individuals and families worldwide. Causes Meesmann corneal dystrophy can result from mutations in either the KRT12 gene or the KRT3 gene. These genes provide instructions for making proteins called keratin 12 and keratin 3, which are found in the corneal epithelium. The two proteins interact to form the structural framework of this layer of the cornea. Mutations in either the KRT12 or KRT3 gene weaken this framework, causing the corneal epithelium to become fragile and to develop the cysts that characterize the disorder. The cysts likely contain clumps of abnormal keratin proteins and other cellular debris. When the cysts rupture, they cause eye irritation and the other symptoms of Meesmann corneal dystrophy. Learn more about the genes associated with Meesmann corneal dystrophy KRT12 KRT3 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of an altered KRT12 or KRT3 gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person inherits the condition from an affected parent. Other Names for This Condition Corneal dystrophy, juvenile epithelial of Meesmann Corneal dystrophy, Meesmann epithelial Juvenile hereditary epithelial dystrophy MECD Meesman's corneal dystrophy Meesmann corneal epithelial dystrophy Meesmann epithelial corneal dystrophy Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Meesmann corneal dystrophy Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Meesmann corneal dystrophy Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CORNEAL DYSTROPHY, MEESMANN, 1; MECD1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Corden LD, Swensson O, Swensson B, Smith FJ, Rochels R, Uitto J, McLEAN WH.
Molecular genetics of Meesmann's corneal dystrophy: ancestral and novel mutations
in keratin 12 (K12) and complete sequence of the human KRT12 gene. Exp Eye Res.
2000 Jan;70(1):41-9. doi: 10.1006/exer.1999.0769. Citation on PubMed Ehlers N, Hjortdal J, Nielsen K, Thiel HJ, Orntoft T. Phenotypic variability
in Meesmann's dystrophy: clinical review of the literature and presentation of a
family genetically identical to the original family. Acta Ophthalmol. 2008
Feb;86(1):40-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0420.2007.00931.x. Epub 2007 Nov 6. Citation on PubMed Irvine AD, Corden LD, Swensson O, Swensson B, Moore JE, Frazer DG, Smith FJ,
Knowlton RG, Christophers E, Rochels R, Uitto J, McLean WH. Mutations in
cornea-specific keratin K3 or K12 genes cause Meesmann's corneal dystrophy. Nat
Genet. 1997 Jun;16(2):184-7. doi: 10.1038/ng0697-184. Citation on PubMed Klintworth GK. Corneal dystrophies. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2009 Feb 23;4:7. doi:
10.1186/1750-1172-4-7. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Nishida K, Honma Y, Dota A, Kawasaki S, Adachi W, Nakamura T, Quantock AJ,
Hosotani H, Yamamoto S, Okada M, Shimomura Y, Kinoshita S. Isolation and
chromosomal localization of a cornea-specific human keratin 12 gene and detection
of four mutations in Meesmann corneal epithelial dystrophy. Am J Hum Genet. 1997
Dec;61(6):1268-75. doi: 10.1086/301650. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Smith F. The molecular genetics of keratin disorders. Am J Clin Dermatol.
2003;4(5):347-64. doi: 10.2165/00128071-200304050-00005. Citation on PubMed Szaflik JP, Oldak M, Maksym RB, Kaminska A, Pollak A, Udziela M, Ploski R,
Szaflik J. Genetics of Meesmann corneal dystrophy: a novel mutation in the
keratin 3 gene in an asymptomatic family suggests genotype-phenotype correlation.
Mol Vis. 2008 Sep 15;14:1713-8. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Corneal Disorders Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Eyelid twitch Genetics Photophobia Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2012