Congenital myasthenic syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Congenital myasthenic syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/congenital-myasthenic-syndrome/ Congenital myasthenic syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Congenital myasthenic syndrome is a group of conditions characterized by muscle weakness (myasthenia) that worsens with physical exertion. The muscle weakness typically begins in early childhood but can also appear in adolescence or adulthood. Facial muscles, including muscles that control the eyelids, muscles that move the eyes, and muscles used for chewing and swallowing, are most commonly affected. However, any of the muscles used for movement ( skeletal muscles ) can be affected in this condition. Due to muscle weakness, affected infants may have feeding difficulties. Development of motor skills such as crawling or walking may be delayed. The severity of the myasthenia varies greatly, with some people experiencing minor weakness and others having such severe weakness that they are unable to walk. Some individuals have episodes of breathing problems that may be triggered by fevers or infection. Severely affected individuals may also experience short pauses in breathing (apnea) that can lead to a bluish appearance of the skin or lips (cyanosis). Frequency The prevalence of congenital myasthenic syndrome is unknown. At least 600 families with affected individuals have been described in the scientific literature. Causes Mutations in many genes can cause congenital myasthenic syndrome. Mutations in the CHRNE gene are responsible for more than half of all cases. A large number of cases are also caused by mutations in the RAPSN , CHAT , COLQ , and DOK7 genes. All of these genes provide instructions for producing proteins that are involved in the normal function of the neuromuscular junction . The neuromuscular junction is the area between the ends of nerve cells and muscle cells where signals are relayed to trigger muscle movement. Gene mutations lead to changes in proteins that play a role in the function of the neuromuscular junction and disrupt signaling between the ends of nerve cells and muscle cells. Disrupted signaling between these cells results in an impaired ability to move skeletal muscles , muscle weakness, and delayed development of motor skills. The respiratory problems in congenital myasthenic syndrome result from impaired movement of the muscles of the chest wall and the muscle that separates the abdomen from the chest cavity ( the diaphragm ). Mutations in other genes that provide instructions for proteins involved in neuromuscular signaling have been found to cause some cases of congenital myasthenic syndrome, although these mutations account for only a small number of cases. Some people with congenital myasthenic syndrome do not have an identified mutation in any of the genes known to be associated with this condition. Learn more about the genes associated with Congenital myasthenic syndrome CHAT CHRNE COLQ DOK7 PLEC RAPSN SCN4A Additional Information from NCBI Gene: AGRN CHRNA1 CHRNB1 CHRND GFPT1 MUSK Inheritance This condition is most commonly inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Rarely, this condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent .  Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Other Names for This Condition CMS Congenital myasthenia Congenital myasthenic syndromes Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: CHRNA1-Related Congenital Myasthenic Syndrome Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital myasthenic syndrome Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital myasthenic syndrome 12 Genetic Testing Registry: Familial infantile myasthenia Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital myasthenic syndrome 10 Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital myasthenic syndrome 11 Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital myasthenic syndrome 16 Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital myasthenic syndrome 1A Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital myasthenic syndrome 2A Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital myasthenic syndrome 3A Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital myasthenic syndrome 4A Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital myasthenic syndrome 5 Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital myasthenic syndrome 8 Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital myasthenic syndrome 9 Genetic Testing Registry: Myasthenic syndrome, congenital, 1B, fast-channel Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Congenital myasthenic syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MYASTHENIC SYNDROME, CONGENITAL, 1A, SLOW-CHANNEL; CMS1A MYASTHENIC SYNDROME, CONGENITAL, 6, PRESYNAPTIC; CMS6 MYASTHENIC SYNDROME, CONGENITAL, 10; CMS10 MYASTHENIC SYNDROME, CONGENITAL, 5; CMS5 MYASTHENIC SYNDROME, CONGENITAL, 1B, FAST-CHANNEL; CMS1B MYASTHENIC SYNDROME, CONGENITAL, 4C, ASSOCIATED WITH ACETYLCHOLINE RECEPTOR DEFICIENCY; CMS4C MYASTHENIC SYNDROME, CONGENITAL, 12; CMS12 MYASTHENIC SYNDROME, CONGENITAL, 16; CMS16 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Barisic N, Chaouch A, Muller JS, Lochmuller H. Genetic heterogeneity and
pathophysiological mechanisms in congenital myasthenic syndromes. Eur J Paediatr
Neurol. 2011 May;15(3):189-96. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2011.03.006. Epub 2011 Apr 17. Citation on PubMed Beeson D, Webster R, Cossins J, Lashley D, Spearman H, Maxwell S, Slater CR,
Newsom-Davis J, Palace J, Vincent A. Congenital myasthenic syndromes and the
formation of the neuromuscular junction. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2008;1132:99-103. doi:
10.1196/annals.1405.049. Citation on PubMed Engel AG, Shen XM, Selcen D, Sine SM. What have we learned from the congenital
myasthenic syndromes. J Mol Neurosci. 2010 Jan;40(1-2):143-53. doi:
10.1007/s12031-009-9229-0. Epub 2009 Aug 18. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Engel AG. Current status of the congenital myasthenic syndromes. Neuromuscul
Disord. 2012 Feb;22(2):99-111. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2011.10.009. Epub 2011 Nov 21. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Kinali M, Beeson D, Pitt MC, Jungbluth H, Simonds AK, Aloysius A, Cockerill H,
Davis T, Palace J, Manzur AY, Jimenez-Mallebrera C, Sewry C, Muntoni F, Robb SA.
Congenital myasthenic syndromes in childhood: diagnostic and management
challenges. J Neuroimmunol. 2008 Sep 15;201-202:6-12. doi:
10.1016/j.jneuroim.2008.06.026. Epub 2008 Aug 15. Citation on PubMed Senderek J, Muller JS, Dusl M, Strom TM, Guergueltcheva V, Diepolder I, Laval
SH, Maxwell S, Cossins J, Krause S, Muelas N, Vilchez JJ, Colomer J, Mallebrera
CJ, Nascimento A, Nafissi S, Kariminejad A, Nilipour Y, Bozorgmehr B, Najmabadi
H, Rodolico C, Sieb JP, Steinlein OK, Schlotter B, Schoser B, Kirschner J,
Herrmann R, Voit T, Oldfors A, Lindbergh C, Urtizberea A, von der Hagen M, Hubner
A, Palace J, Bushby K, Straub V, Beeson D, Abicht A, Lochmuller H. Hexosamine
biosynthetic pathway mutations cause neuromuscular transmission defect. Am J Hum
Genet. 2011 Feb 11;88(2):162-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.01.008. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Neuromuscular Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated November 1, 2011