Dubin-Johnson syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Dubin-Johnson syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/dubin-johnson-syndrome/ Dubin-Johnson syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Dubin-Johnson syndrome is a condition characterized by jaundice, which is a yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes . In most affected people jaundice appears during adolescence or early adulthood. Jaundice is typically the only feature of Dubin-Johnson syndrome, but some people can experience weakness, mild abdominal pain, nausea, or vomiting. In most people with Dubin-Johnson syndrome, certain deposits build up in t he liver but do not seem to impair liver function. The deposits make the liver appear black when viewed with medical imaging. Rarely, jaundice develops soon after birth in individuals with Dubin-Johnson syndrome. Affected infants typically also have enlarged livers (hepatomegaly) and a severely reduced ability to produce and release a digestive fluid called bile (cholestasis). As these children get older, their liver problems go away and they usually do not have any related health problems later in life. Frequency The prevalence of Dubin-Johnson syndrome is unknown. It appears to be most common in Iranian and Moroccan Jews living in Israel, with 1 in 1,300 individuals affected. Additionally, several people in the Japanese population have been diagnosed with Dubin-Johnson syndrome. This condition appears to be less common in other populations. Causes Dubin-Johnson syndrome is caused by changes in a gene known as ABCC2 . The ABCC2 gene provides instructions for making a protein that transports certain substances out of cells so they can be released (excreted) from the body. For example, this protein transports a substance called bilirubin out of liver cells and into bile (a digestive fluid produced by the liver). Bilirubin is produced during the breakdown of old red blood cells and has an orange-yellow tint. ABCC2 gene mutations result in the production of a protein with reduced or absent activity that cannot effectively transport substances out of cells. These mutations particularly affect moving bilirubin into bile. As a result, bilirubin accumulates in the body, causing a condition called hyperbilirubinemia. The buildup of bilirubin in the body causes the yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes in people with Dubin-Johnson syndrome. The black liver in affected individuals is due to a buildup of different substance normally transported out of the liver by the protein produced from the ABCC2 gene. Learn more about the gene associated with Dubin-Johnson syndrome ABCC2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Black liver-jaundice syndrome Chronic idiopathic jaundice Chronic idiopathic jaundice with pigmented liver DJS Dubin-Sprinz syndrome Hyperbilirubinemia II Hyperbilirubinemia, Dubin-Johnson type Jaundice, chronic idiopathic Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Dubin-Johnson syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Dubin-Johnson syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM DUBIN-JOHNSON SYNDROME; DJS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Devgun MS, El-Nujumi AM, O'Dowd GJ, Barbu V, Poupon R. Novel mutations in the
Dubin-Johnson syndrome gene ABCC2/MRP2 and associated biochemical changes. Ann
Clin Biochem. 2012 Nov;49(Pt 6):609-12. doi: 10.1258/acb.2012.011279. Epub 2012
Oct 12. Citation on PubMed Erlinger S, Arias IM, Dhumeaux D. Inherited disorders of bilirubin transport
and conjugation: new insights into molecular mechanisms and consequences.
Gastroenterology. 2014 Jun;146(7):1625-38. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2014.03.047.
Epub 2014 Apr 1. Citation on PubMed Lee JH, Chen HL, Chen HL, Ni YH, Hsu HY, Chang MH. Neonatal Dubin-Johnson
syndrome: long-term follow-up and MRP2 mutations study. Pediatr Res. 2006
Apr;59(4 Pt 1):584-9. doi: 10.1203/01.pdr.0000203093.10908.bb. Citation on PubMed Machida I, Wakusawa S, Sanae F, Hayashi H, Kusakabe A, Ninomiya H, Yano M,
Yoshioka K. Mutational analysis of the MRP2 gene and long-term follow-up of
Dubin-Johnson syndrome in Japan. J Gastroenterol. 2005 Apr;40(4):366-70. doi:
10.1007/s00535-004-1555-y. Citation on PubMed Memon N, Weinberger BI, Hegyi T, Aleksunes LM. Inherited disorders of
bilirubin clearance. Pediatr Res. 2016 Mar;79(3):378-86. doi:
10.1038/pr.2015.247. Epub 2015 Nov 23. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Rastogi A, Krishnani N, Pandey R. Dubin-Johnson syndrome--a clinicopathologic
study of twenty cases. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2006 Oct;49(4):500-4. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Jaundice MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Bilirubin blood test Dubin-Johnson syndrome Genetics Related Medical Tests Bilirubin Blood Test Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2018