Fragile XE syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Fragile XE syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/fragile-xe-syndrome/ Fragile XE syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Fragile XE syndrome is a genetic disorder that impairs thinking ability and cognitive functioning. Most affected individuals have mild intellectual disabilities. In some people with this condition, cognitive function is described as borderline, which means that it is below average but not low enough to be classified as an intellectual disability. Females are rarely diagnosed with fragile XE syndrome, likely because the signs and symptoms are so mild, if present at all. Learning disabilities are the most common sign of impaired cognitive function in people with fragile XE syndrome. The learning disabilities are likely a result of communication and behavioral problems, including delayed speech, poor writing skills, hyperactivity, and a short attention span. Some affected individuals display autistic behaviors, such as hand flapping, repetitive behaviors, and intense interest in a particular subject. Unlike some other forms of intellectual disability, cognitive functioning remains steady and does not decline with age in fragile XE syndrome. Frequency Fragile XE syndrome is estimated to affect 1 in 25,000 to 100,000 newborn males. Because mildly affected individuals may never be diagnosed, it is thought that the condition may be more common than reported. Causes Fragile XE syndrome is caused by variants (also called mutations) in the AFF2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein whose function is not well understood. Some studies show that the AFF2 protein can attach (bind) to DNA and help control the activity of other genes. Other studies suggest that the AFF2 protein is involved in the process by which the blueprint for making proteins is cut and rearranged to produce different versions of the protein ( alternative splicing ). Researchers are working to determine which genes and proteins are affected by AFF2. Nearly all cases of fragile XE syndrome occur when a region of the AFF2 gene, known as the CCG trinucleotide repeat, is abnormally expanded. Normally, this segment of three DNA building blocks (nucleotides) is repeated approximately 6 to 30 times. However, in people with fragile XE syndrome, the CCG segment is repeated more than 200 times, which makes this region of the gene unstable. (When expanded, this region is known as the FRAXE fragile site.) As a result, the AFF2 gene is turned off (silenced), and no AFF2 protein is produced. It is unclear how a shortage of this protein leads to intellectual disabilities in people with fragile XE syndrome. Learn more about the gene associated with Fragile XE syndrome AFF2 Inheritance Fragile XE syndrome is inherited in an X-linked pattern. A condition is considered X-linked if the altered gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes in each cell. In males (who have only one X chromosome), a variant in the only copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two copies of the X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene rarely causes the condition and the features are often less severe than in individuals with both copies altered. Some females with only one altered copy of the gene may have no signs or symptoms at all. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons. People with 61 to 200 CCG repeats are said to have an AFF2 gene premutation. In parents with a AFF2 gene premutation, the number of CCG repeats can expand to more than 200 in cells that develop into eggs or sperm. This means that parents with the premutation have an increased risk of having a child with fragile XE syndrome. In people with 31-60 CCG repeats, the number of repeats can expand in cells that develop into eggs or sperm, but it is still likely not large enough to lead to fragile XE syndrome. Other Names for This Condition FRAXE intellectual deficit FRAXE intellectual disability FRAXE syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: FRAXE Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center FRAXE intellectual disability Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDER, X-LINKED 109; XLID109 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Gecz J, Gedeon AK, Sutherland GR, Mulley JC. Identification of the gene FMR2,
associated with FRAXE mental retardation. Nat Genet. 1996 May;13(1):105-8. doi:
10.1038/ng0596-105. Citation on PubMed Gecz J. The FMR2 gene, FRAXE and non-specific X-linked mental retardation:
clinical and molecular aspects. Ann Hum Genet. 2000 Mar;64(Pt 2):95-106. doi:
10.1017/S0003480000007983. Citation on PubMed Knight SJ, Flannery AV, Hirst MC, Campbell L, Christodoulou Z, Phelps SR,
Pointon J, Middleton-Price HR, Barnicoat A, Pembrey ME, et al. Trinucleotide
repeat amplification and hypermethylation of a CpG island in FRAXE mental
retardation. Cell. 1993 Jul 16;74(1):127-34. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(93)90300-f. Citation on PubMed Melko M, Douguet D, Bensaid M, Zongaro S, Verheggen C, Gecz J, Bardoni B.
Functional characterization of the AFF (AF4/FMR2) family of RNA-binding proteins:
insights into the molecular pathology of FRAXE intellectual disability. Hum Mol
Genet. 2011 May 15;20(10):1873-85. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr069. Epub 2011 Feb 17. Citation on PubMed Silva C, Maia N, Santos F, Rodrigues B, Marques I, Santos R, Jorge P.
Development and validation in 500 female samples of a TP-PCR assay to identify
AFF2 GCC expansions. Sci Rep. 2021 Jul 19;11(1):14676. doi:
10.1038/s41598-021-93473-5. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Developmental Disabilities Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Intellectual disability Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated July 17, 2024