Complement factor I deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Complement factor I deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/complement-factor-i-deficiency/ Complement factor I deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Complement factor I deficiency is a disorder that affects the immune system. People with this condition are prone to recurrent infections, including infections of the upper respiratory tract, ears, skin, and urinary tract. They may also contract more serious infections such as pneumonia, meningitis, and sepsis , which may be life-threatening. Some people with complement factor I deficiency have a kidney disorder called glomerulonephritis with isolated C3 deposits. Complement factor I deficiency can also be associated with autoimmune disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis or systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Autoimmune disorders occur when the immune system malfunctions and attacks the body's tissues and organs. Frequency Complement factor I deficiency is a rare disorder; its exact prevalence is unknown. At least 38 cases have been reported in the medical literature. Causes Complement factor I deficiency is caused by mutations in the CFI gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called complement factor I. This protein helps regulate a part of the body's immune response known as the complement system . The complement system is a group of proteins that work together to destroy foreign invaders (such as bacteria and viruses), trigger inflammation , and remove debris from cells and tissues. This system must be carefully regulated so it targets only unwanted materials and does not attack the body's healthy cells. Complement factor I and several related proteins protect healthy cells by preventing activation of the complement system when it is not needed. Mutations in the CFI gene that cause complement factor I deficiency result in abnormal, nonfunctional, or absent complement factor I. The lack (deficiency) of functional complement factor I protein allows uncontrolled activation of the complement system. The unregulated activity of the complement system decreases blood levels of another complement protein called C3, reducing the immune system's ability to fight infections. In addition, the immune system may malfunction and attack its own tissues, resulting in autoimmune disorders. Learn more about the gene associated with Complement factor I deficiency CFI Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition C3 inactivator deficiency Complement component 3 inactivator deficiency Hereditary factor I deficiency disease Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary factor I deficiency disease Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM COMPLEMENT FACTOR I DEFICIENCY; CFID Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Baracho GV, Nudelman V, Isaac L. Molecular characterization of homozygous
hereditary factor I deficiency. Clin Exp Immunol. 2003 Feb;131(2):280-6. doi:
10.1046/j.1365-2249.2003.02077.x. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Grumach AS, Leitao MF, Arruk VG, Kirschfink M, Condino-Neto A. Recurrent
infections in partial complement factor I deficiency: evaluation of three
generations of a Brazilian family. Clin Exp Immunol. 2006 Feb;143(2):297-304.
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2005.02988.x. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Nilsson SC, Trouw LA, Renault N, Miteva MA, Genel F, Zelazko M, Marquart H,
Muller K, Sjoholm AG, Truedsson L, Villoutreix BO, Blom AM. Genetic, molecular
and functional analyses of complement factor I deficiency. Eur J Immunol. 2009
Jan;39(1):310-23. doi: 10.1002/eji.200838702. Citation on PubMed Pettigrew HD, Teuber SS, Gershwin ME. Clinical significance of complement
deficiencies. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009 Sep;1173:108-23. doi:
10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04633.x. Citation on PubMed Ponce-Castro IM, Gonzalez-Rubio C, Delgado-Cervino EM, Abarrategui-Garrido C,
Fontan G, Sanchez-Corral P, Lopez-Trascasa M. Molecular characterization of
Complement Factor I deficiency in two Spanish families. Mol Immunol. 2008
May;45(10):2764-71. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2008.02.008. Epub 2008 Mar 28. Citation on PubMed Vyse TJ, Morley BJ, Bartok I, Theodoridis EL, Davies KA, Webster AD, Walport
MJ. The molecular basis of hereditary complement factor I deficiency. J Clin
Invest. 1996 Feb 15;97(4):925-33. doi: 10.1172/JCI118515. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Vyse TJ, Spath PJ, Davies KA, Morley BJ, Philippe P, Athanassiou P, Giles CM,
Walport MJ. Hereditary complement factor I deficiency. QJM. 1994
Jul;87(7):385-401. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Immune System and Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Complement Genetics Immunodeficiency disorders Related Medical Tests Complement Blood Test Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated September 1, 2010