Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/wolff-parkinson-white-syndrome/ Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome is a condition characterized by abnormal electrical pathways in the heart that cause a disruption of the heart's normal rhythm (arrhythmia). The heartbeat is controlled by electrical signals that move through the heart in a highly coordinated way.  A specialized cluster of cells called the atrioventricular node conducts electrical impulses from the heart's upper chambers (the atria) to the lower chambers (the ventricles).  Impulses move through the atrioventricular node during each heartbeat, stimulating the ventricles to contract slightly later than the atria. People with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome are born with an extra connection in the heart, called an accessory pathway, that allows electrical signals to bypass the atrioventricular node and move from the atria to the ventricles faster than usual.  The accessory pathway may also transmit electrical impulses abnormally from the ventricles back to the atria.  This extra connection can disrupt the coordinated movement of electrical signals through the heart, leading to an abnormally fast heartbeat ( tachycardia ) and other changes in heart rhythm.  Resulting symptoms include dizziness, a sensation of fluttering or pounding in the chest (palpitations), shortness of breath, and fainting (syncope).  In rare cases, arrhythmias associated with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome can lead to cardiac arrest and sudden death.  The most common arrhythmia associated with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome is called paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia. Complications of Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome can occur at any age, although some individuals born with an accessory pathway in the heart never experience any health problems associated with the condition. Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome often occurs with other structural abnormalities of the heart or underlying heart disease.  The most common heart defect associated with the condition is Ebstein anomaly, which affects the valve that allows blood to flow from the right atrium to the right ventricle (the tricuspid valve). Additionally, the heart rhythm problems associated with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome can be a component of several other genetic syndromes, including hypokalemic periodic paralysis (a condition that causes episodes of extreme muscle weakness), Pompe disease (a disorder characterized by the storage of excess glycogen), Danon disease (a condition that weakens the heart and skeletal muscles and causes intellectual disability), and tuberous sclerosis complex (a condition that results in the growth of noncancerous tumors in many parts of the body). Frequency Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome affects 1 to 3 in 1,000 people worldwide. Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome is a common cause of an arrhythmia known as paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia. Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome is the most frequent cause of this abnormal heart rhythm in the Chinese population, where it is responsible for more than 70 percent of cases. Causes In most cases, the cause of Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome is unknown. A small percentage of all cases are caused by variants (also known as mutations) in the PRKAG2 gene. Some people with these variants also have features of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, a form of heart disease that enlarges and weakens the heart (cardiac) muscle. The PRKAG2 gene provides instructions for making a protein that is part of an enzyme called AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK).  This enzyme helps sense and respond to energy demands within cells. It is likely involved in the development of the heart before birth, although its role in this process is unclear. Researchers are uncertain how PRKAG2 gene variants lead to the development of Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome and related heart abnormalities. Research suggests that these variants alter the activity of AMP-activated protein kinase in the heart, although it is unclear whether the genetic changes overactivate the enzyme or reduce its activity. Studies indicate that changes in AMP-activated protein kinase activity allow a complex sugar called glycogen to build up abnormally within cardiac muscle cells. Other studies have found that altered AMP-activated protein kinase activity is related to changes in the regulation of certain ion channels in the heart. These channels, which transport positively charged atoms (ions) into and out of cardiac muscle cells, play critical roles in maintaining the heart's normal rhythm. Learn more about the gene associated with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome PRKAG2 Inheritance Most cases of Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome occur in people with no apparent family history of the condition.  These cases are described as sporadic and are not inherited. Familial Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome accounts for only a small percentage of all cases of this condition.  The familial form of the disorder typically has an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition.  In most cases, a person with familial Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome has inherited the condition from an affected parent. Other Names for This Condition Ventricular pre-excitation with arrhythmia WPW Syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Wolff-Parkinson-White pattern Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM WOLFF-PARKINSON-WHITE SYNDROME; WPW Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Al-Khatib SM, Pritchett EL. Clinical features of Wolff-Parkinson-White
syndrome. Am Heart J. 1999 Sep;138(3 Pt 1):403-13. doi:
10.1016/s0002-8703(99)70140-7. Citation on PubMed Benson DW, Cohen MI. Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome: lessons learnt and
lessons remaining. Cardiol Young. 2017 Jan;27(S1):S62-S67. doi:
10.1017/S1047951116002250. Citation on PubMed Gollob MH, Green MS, Tang AS, Gollob T, Karibe A, Ali Hassan AS, Ahmad F,
Lozado R, Shah G, Fananapazir L, Bachinski LL, Roberts R. Identification of a
gene responsible for familial Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2001
Jun 14;344(24):1823-31. doi: 10.1056/NEJM200106143442403. Erratum In: N Engl J
Med 2001 Aug 16;345(7):552. Hassan AS [corrected to Ali Hassan AS]. N Engl J Med
2002 Jan 24;346(4):300. Citation on PubMed Light PE. Familial Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome: a disease of glycogen
storage or ion channel dysfunction? J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2006 May;17
Suppl 1:S158-S161. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-8167.2006.00399.x. Citation on PubMed Pediatric and Congenital Electrophysiology Society (PACES); Heart Rhythm
Society (HRS); American College of Cardiology Foundation (ACCF); American Heart
Association (AHA); American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP); Canadian Heart Rhythm
Society (CHRS); Cohen MI, Triedman JK, Cannon BC, Davis AM, Drago F, Janousek J,
Klein GJ, Law IH, Morady FJ, Paul T, Perry JC, Sanatani S, Tanel RE. PACES/HRS
expert consensus statement on the management of the asymptomatic young patient
with a Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW, ventricular preexcitation)
electrocardiographic pattern: developed in partnership between the Pediatric and
Congenital Electrophysiology Society (PACES) and the Heart Rhythm Society (HRS).
Endorsed by the governing bodies of PACES, HRS, the American College of
Cardiology Foundation (ACCF), the American Heart Association (AHA), the American
Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), and the Canadian Heart Rhythm Society (CHRS). Heart
Rhythm. 2012 Jun;9(6):1006-24. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2012.03.050. Epub 2012 May
10. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Valderrama AL. Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome: essentials for the primary care
nurse practitioner. J Am Acad Nurse Pract. 2004 Sep;16(9):378-83. doi:
10.1111/j.1745-7599.2004.tb00387.x. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Arrhythmia Genetic Disorders Heart Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (WPW) Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated July 11, 2022