Amish lethal microcephaly: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Amish lethal microcephaly URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/amish-lethal-microcephaly/ Amish lethal microcephaly To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Amish lethal microcephaly is a disorder in which infants are born with an usually small head (microcephaly) and underdeveloped brain. Infants with Amish lethal microcephaly have a sloping forehead and an extremely small head size. They may also have an unusually small lower jaw and chin (micrognathia) and an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly). Affected infants may have seizures and difficulty maintaining their body temperature. Often they become very irritable starting in the second or third month of life. A compound called alpha-ketoglutaric acid can be detected in their urine (alpha-ketoglutaric aciduria), and during episodes of viral illness they tend to develop elevated levels of acid in the blood and tissues (metabolic acidosis). Infants with this disorder typically feed adequately but do not develop skills such as purposeful movement or the ability to track faces and sounds. Affected infants live only about six months. Frequency Amish lethal microcephaly occurs in approximately 1 in 500 newborns in the Old Order Amish population of Pennsylvania. It has not been found outside this population. Causes Mutations in the SLC25A19 gene cause Amish lethal microcephaly. The SLC25A19 gene provides instructions for producing a protein that is a member of the solute carrier (SLC) family of proteins. Proteins in the SLC family transport various compounds across the membranes surrounding the cell and its component parts. The protein produced from the SLC25A19 gene transports a molecule called thiamine pyrophosphate into the mitochondria , the energy-producing centers of cells. This compound is involved in the activity of a group of mitochondrial enzymes called the dehydrogenase complexes, one of which is the alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex. The transport of thiamine pyrophosphate into the mitochondria is believed to be important in brain development. All known individuals with Amish lethal microcephaly have a mutation in which the protein building block (amino acid) alanine is substituted for the amino acid glycine at position 177 of the SLC25A19 protein, written as Gly177Ala or G177A. Researchers believe that this mutation interferes with the transport of thiamine pyrophosphate into the mitochondria and the activity of the alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex, resulting in the abnormal brain development and alpha-ketoglutaric aciduria seen in Amish lethal microcephaly. Learn more about the gene associated with Amish lethal microcephaly SLC25A19 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Amish microcephaly MCPHA Microcephaly, Amish type Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Amish lethal microcephaly Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Amish lethal microcephaly Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MICROCEPHALY, AMISH TYPE; MCPHA Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Kelley RI, Robinson D, Puffenberger EG, Strauss KA, Morton DH. Amish lethal
microcephaly: a new metabolic disorder with severe congenital microcephaly and
2-ketoglutaric aciduria. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Nov 1;112(4):318-26. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.10529. Citation on PubMed Korf BR. What's new in neurogenetics? Amish microcephaly. Eur J Paediatr
Neurol. 2003;7(6):393-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2003.09.005. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Lindhurst MJ, Fiermonte G, Song S, Struys E, De Leonardis F, Schwartzberg PL,
Chen A, Castegna A, Verhoeven N, Mathews CK, Palmieri F, Biesecker LG. Knockout
of Slc25a19 causes mitochondrial thiamine pyrophosphate depletion, embryonic
lethality, CNS malformations, and anemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Oct
24;103(43):15927-32. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0607661103. Epub 2006 Oct 11. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Rosenberg MJ, Agarwala R, Bouffard G, Davis J, Fiermonte G, Hilliard MS, Koch
T, Kalikin LM, Makalowska I, Morton DH, Petty EM, Weber JL, Palmieri F, Kelley
RI, Schaffer AA, Biesecker LG. Mutant deoxynucleotide carrier is associated with
congenital microcephaly. Nat Genet. 2002 Sep;32(1):175-9. doi: 10.1038/ng948.
Epub 2002 Aug 19. Citation on PubMed Siu VM, Ratko S, Prasad AN, Prasad C, Rupar CA. Amish microcephaly: Long-term
survival and biochemical characterization. Am J Med Genet A. 2010
Jul;152A(7):1747-51. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33373. Citation on PubMed Tabarki B, Thabet F, Alfadhel M. SLC25A19-Related Thiamine Metabolism
Dysfunction. 2003 Sep 4 [updated 2023 Mar 30]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM,
Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1365/ Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Brain Malformations Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Microcephaly Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated July 1, 2013