Piebaldism: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Piebaldism URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/piebaldism/ Piebaldism To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Piebaldism is a condition characterized by the absence of cells  called melanocytes in certain areas of the skin and hair. Melanocytes produce the pigment melanin, which contributes to hair, eye, and skin color. The absence of melanocytes leads to patches of skin and hair that are lighter than normal. Approximately 90 percent of affected individuals have a white section of hair near their front hairline (a white forelock). The eyelashes, the eyebrows, and the skin under the forelock may also be unpigmented. People with piebaldism usually have other unpigmented patches of skin, typically appearing symmetrically on both sides of the body. There may be spots or patches of pigmented skin within or around the borders of the unpigmented areas. In most cases, the unpigmented areas are present at birth and do not increase in size or number. The unpigmented patches are at increased risk of sunburn and skin cancer related to excessive sun exposure. Some people with piebaldism are self-conscious about the appearance of the unpigmented patches, which may be more noticeable in darker-skinned people. Aside from these potential issues, this condition has no effect on the health of the affected individual. Frequency The prevalence of piebaldism is unknown. Causes Piebaldism can be caused by mutations in the KIT and SNAI2 genes. Piebaldism may also be a feature of other conditions, such as Waardenburg syndrome ; these conditions have other genetic causes and additional signs and symptoms. The KIT gene provides instructions for making a protein that is involved in signaling within cells. KIT protein signaling is important for the development of certain cell types, including melanocytes . The KIT gene mutations responsible for piebaldism lead to a nonfunctional KIT protein. The loss of KIT signaling is thought to disrupt the growth and division (proliferation) and movement (migration) of melanocytes during development, resulting in patches of skin that lack pigmentation. The SNAI2 gene (often called SLUG ) provides instructions for making a protein called snail 2. Research indicates that the snail 2 protein is required during embryonic growth for the development of cells called neural crest cells. Neural crest cells migrate from the developing spinal cord to specific regions in the embryo and give rise to many tissues and cell types, including melanocytes. The snail 2 protein probably plays a role in the formation and survival of melanocytes. SNAI2 gene mutations that cause piebaldism probably reduce the production of the snail 2 protein.  Shortage of the snail 2 protein may disrupt the development of melanocytes in certain areas of the skin and hair, causing the patchy loss of pigment. Piebaldism is sometimes mistaken for another condition called vitiligo , which also causes unpigmented patches of skin. People are not born with vitiligo, but acquire it later in life, and it is not caused by specific genetic mutations. For unknown reasons, in people with vitiligo the immune system appears to damage the melanocytes in the skin. Learn more about the genes associated with Piebaldism KIT SNAI2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition PBT Piebald trait Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Piebaldism Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Piebaldism Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PIEBALD TRAIT; PBT Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Dessinioti C, Stratigos AJ, Rigopoulos D, Katsambas AD. A review of genetic
disorders of hypopigmentation: lessons learned from the biology of melanocytes.
Exp Dermatol. 2009 Sep;18(9):741-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2009.00896.x. Epub
2009 Jun 23. Citation on PubMed Ezoe K, Holmes SA, Ho L, Bennett CP, Bolognia JL, Brueton L, Burn J, Falabella
R, Gatto EM, Ishii N, et al. Novel mutations and deletions of the KIT (steel
factor receptor) gene in human piebaldism. Am J Hum Genet. 1995 Jan;56(1):58-66. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Lopez V, Jorda E. Piebaldism in a 2-year-old girl. Dermatol Online J. 2011 Feb
15;17(2):13. Citation on PubMed Sanchez-Martin M, Perez-Losada J, Rodriguez-Garcia A, Gonzalez-Sanchez B, Korf
BR, Kuster W, Moss C, Spritz RA, Sanchez-Garcia I. Deletion of the SLUG (SNAI2)
gene results in human piebaldism. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Oct 1;122A(2):125-32.
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20345. Citation on PubMed Spritz RA, Giebel LB, Holmes SA. Dominant negative and loss of function
mutations of the c-kit (mast/stem cell growth factor receptor) proto-oncogene in
human piebaldism. Am J Hum Genet. 1992 Feb;50(2):261-9. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Spritz RA. Molecular basis of human piebaldism. J Invest Dermatol. 1994
Nov;103(5 Suppl):137S-140S. doi: 10.1111/1523-1747.ep12399455. Citation on PubMed Spritz RA. Piebaldism, Waardenburg syndrome, and related disorders of
melanocyte development. Semin Cutan Med Surg. 1997 Mar;16(1):15-23. doi:
10.1016/s1085-5629(97)80031-4. Citation on PubMed Thomas I, Kihiczak GG, Fox MD, Janniger CK, Schwartz RA. Piebaldism: an
update. Int J Dermatol. 2004 Oct;43(10):716-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-4632.2004.02114.x. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Skin Pigmentation Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Abnormally dark or light skin Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2013