Congenital afibrinogenemia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Congenital afibrinogenemia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/congenital-afibrinogenemia/ Congenital afibrinogenemia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Congenital afibrinogenemia is a bleeding disorder caused by impairment of the blood clotting process. Normally, blood clots protect the body after an injury by sealing off damaged blood vessels and preventing further blood loss. However, bleeding is uncontrolled in people with congenital afibrinogenemia. Newborns with this condition often experience prolonged bleeding from the umbilical cord stump after birth. Nosebleeds (epistaxis) and bleeding from the gums or tongue are common and can occur after minor trauma or in the absence of injury (spontaneous bleeding). Some affected individuals experience bleeding into the spaces between joints (hemarthrosis) or the muscles (hematoma). Rarely, bleeding in the brain or other internal organs occurs, which can be fatal. Women with congenital afibrinogenemia can have abnormally heavy menstrual bleeding (menorrhagia). Without proper treatment, women with this disorder may have difficulty carrying a pregnancy to term, resulting in repeated miscarriages. Frequency Congenital afibrinogenemia is a rare condition that occurs in approximately 1 in 1 million newborns. Causes Congenital afibrinogenemia results from mutations in one of three genes, FGA , FGB , or FGG . Each of these genes provides instructions for making one part (subunit) of a protein called fibrinogen. This protein is important for blood clot formation (coagulation), which is needed to stop excessive bleeding after injury. In response to injury, fibrinogen is converted to fibrin, the main protein in blood clots. Fibrin proteins attach to each other, forming a stable network that makes up the blood clot. Congenital afibrinogenemia is caused by a complete absence of fibrinogen protein. Most FGA , FGB , and FGG gene mutations that cause this condition result in a premature stop signal in the instructions for making the respective protein. If any protein is made, it is nonfunctional. When any one subunit is missing, the fibrinogen protein is not assembled, which results in the absence of fibrin. Consequently, blood clots do not form in response to injury, leading to the excessive bleeding seen in people with congenital afibrinogenemia. Learn more about the genes associated with Congenital afibrinogenemia FGA FGB FGG Inheritance Congenital afibrinogenemia is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene. The parents have about half the normal level of fibrinogen in their blood but typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Afibrinogenemia Familial afibrinogenemia Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary factor I deficiency disease Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Familial afibrinogenemia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM AFIBRINOGENEMIA, CONGENITAL Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Casini A, Lukowski S, Quintard VL, Crutu A, Zak M, Regazzoni S, de Moerloose
P, Neerman-Arbez M. FGB mutations leading to congenital quantitative fibrinogen
deficiencies: an update and report of four novel mutations. Thromb Res. 2014
May;133(5):868-74. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2014.01.022. Epub 2014 Jan 25. Citation on PubMed de Moerloose P, Casini A, Neerman-Arbez M. Congenital fibrinogen disorders: an
update. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2013 Sep;39(6):585-95. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1349222.
Epub 2013 Jul 12. Citation on PubMed Lak M, Keihani M, Elahi F, Peyvandi F, Mannucci PM. Bleeding and thrombosis in
55 patients with inherited afibrinogenaemia. Br J Haematol. 1999
Oct;107(1):204-6. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2141.1999.01681.x. Citation on PubMed Neerman-Arbez M, de Moerloose P, Bridel C, Honsberger A, Schonborner A,
Rossier C, Peerlinck K, Claeyssens S, Di Michele D, d'Oiron R, Dreyfus M,
Laubriat-Bianchin M, Dieval J, Antonarakis SE, Morris MA. Mutations in the
fibrinogen aalpha gene account for the majority of cases of congenital
afibrinogenemia. Blood. 2000 Jul 1;96(1):149-52. Citation on PubMed Neerman-Arbez M, de Moerloose P, Honsberger A, Parlier G, Arnuti B, Biron C,
Borg JY, Eber S, Meili E, Peter-Salonen K, Ripoll L, Vervel C, d'Oiron R, Staeger
P, Antonarakis SE, Morris MA. Molecular analysis of the fibrinogen gene cluster
in 16 patients with congenital afibrinogenemia: novel truncating mutations in the
FGA and FGG genes. Hum Genet. 2001 Mar;108(3):237-40. doi: 10.1007/s004390100469. Citation on PubMed Neerman-Arbez M, Honsberger A, Antonarakis SE, Morris MA. Deletion of the
fibrinogen [correction of fibrogen] alpha-chain gene (FGA) causes congenital
afibrogenemia. J Clin Invest. 1999 Jan;103(2):215-8. doi: 10.1172/JCI5471.
Erratum In: J Clin Invest 1999 Mar;103(5):759. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Neerman-Arbez M. Molecular basis of fibrinogen deficiency. Pathophysiol
Haemost Thromb. 2006;35(1-2):187-98. doi: 10.1159/000093566. Citation on PubMed Weisel JW. Fibrinogen and fibrin. Adv Protein Chem. 2005;70:247-99. doi:
10.1016/S0065-3233(05)70008-5. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Bleeding Disorders Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Congenital fibrinogen deficiency Fibrinogen blood test Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated September 1, 2014