Infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/infantile-neuroaxonal-dystrophy/ Infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy is a disorder that primarily affects the nervous system. Individuals with infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy typically do not have any symptoms at birth, but between the ages of about 6 and 18 months they begin to experience delays in acquiring new motor and intellectual skills, such as crawling or beginning to speak. Eventually they lose previously acquired skills (developmental regression). In some cases, signs and symptoms of infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy first appear later in childhood or during the teenage years and progress more slowly. Children with infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy experience progressive difficulties with movement. They generally have muscles that are at first weak and "floppy" (hypotonic), and then gradually become very stiff (spastic). Eventually, affected children lose the ability to move independently. Lack of muscle strength causes difficulty with feeding. Muscle weakness can also result in breathing problems that can lead to frequent infections, such as pneumonia. Seizures occur in some affected children. Rapid, involuntary eye movements (nystagmus), eyes that do not look in the same direction (strabismus), and vision loss due to deterioration (atrophy) of the nerve that carries information from the eye to the brain (the optic nerve) often occur in infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy. Hearing loss may also develop. Children with this disorder experience progressive deterioration of cognitive functions (dementia), and they eventually lose awareness of their surroundings. Infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy is characterized by the development of swellings called spheroid bodies in the axons , the fibers that extend from nerve cells (neurons) and transmit impulses to muscles and other neurons. In some individuals with infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy, abnormal amounts of iron accumulate in a specific region of the brain called the basal ganglia . The relationship of these features to the symptoms of infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy is unknown. Frequency Infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy is a very rare disorder. Its specific incidence is unknown. Causes Mutations in the PLA2G6 gene have been identified in most individuals with infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy. The PLA2G6 gene provides instructions for making a type of enzyme called an A2 phospholipase. This type of enzyme is involved in breaking down (metabolizing) fats called phospholipids. Phospholipid metabolism is important for many body processes, including helping to keep the cell membrane intact and functioning properly. Specifically, the A2 phospholipase produced from the PLA2G6 gene, sometimes called PLA2 group VI, helps to regulate the levels of a compound called phosphatidylcholine, which is abundant in the cell membrane. Mutations in the PLA2G6 gene impair the function of the PLA2 group VI enzyme, which may disrupt cell membrane maintenance and contribute to the development of spheroid bodies in the nerve axons. Although it is unknown how changes in this enzyme's function lead to the signs and symptoms of infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy, phospholipid metabolism problems have been seen in both this disorder and a similar disorder called pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration . These disorders, as well as the more common Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease , also are associated with changes in brain iron metabolism. Researchers are studying the links between phospholipid defects, brain iron, and damage to nerve cells, but have not determined how the iron accumulation that occurs in some individuals with infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy may contribute to the features of this disorder. A few individuals with infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy have not been found to have mutations in the PLA2G6 gene. The genetic cause of the condition in these cases is unknown; there is evidence that at least one other unidentified gene may be involved. Learn more about the gene associated with Infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy PLA2G6 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition INAD NBIA, PLA2G6-related Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation, PLA2G6-related Seitelberger disease Seitelberger's disease Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 2A; NBIA2A Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Engel LA, Jing Z, O'Brien DE, Sun M, Kotzbauer PT. Catalytic function of
PLA2G6 is impaired by mutations associated with infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy
but not dystonia-parkinsonism. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 23;5(9):e12897. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0012897. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Hayflick SJ. Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation: from genes to
pathogenesis. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 2006 Sep;13(3):182-5. doi:
10.1016/j.spen.2006.08.007. Citation on PubMed Khateeb S, Flusser H, Ofir R, Shelef I, Narkis G, Vardi G, Shorer Z, Levy R,
Galil A, Elbedour K, Birk OS. PLA2G6 mutation underlies infantile neuroaxonal
dystrophy. Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Nov;79(5):942-8. doi: 10.1086/508572. Epub 2006
Sep 19. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Kurian MA, Morgan NV, MacPherson L, Foster K, Peake D, Gupta R, Philip SG,
Hendriksz C, Morton JE, Kingston HM, Rosser EM, Wassmer E, Gissen P, Maher ER.
Phenotypic spectrum of neurodegeneration associated with mutations in the PLA2G6
gene (PLAN). Neurology. 2008 Apr 29;70(18):1623-9. doi:
10.1212/01.wnl.0000310986.48286.8e. Citation on PubMed McNeill A, Chinnery PF. Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation. Handb
Clin Neurol. 2011;100:161-72. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-52014-2.00009-4. Citation on PubMed Morgan NV, Westaway SK, Morton JE, Gregory A, Gissen P, Sonek S, Cangul H,
Coryell J, Canham N, Nardocci N, Zorzi G, Pasha S, Rodriguez D, Desguerre I,
Mubaidin A, Bertini E, Trembath RC, Simonati A, Schanen C, Johnson CA, Levinson
B, Woods CG, Wilmot B, Kramer P, Gitschier J, Maher ER, Hayflick SJ. PLA2G6,
encoding a phospholipase A2, is mutated in neurodegenerative disorders with high
brain iron. Nat Genet. 2006 Jul;38(7):752-4. doi: 10.1038/ng1826. Epub 2006 Jun
18. Erratum In: Nat Genet. 2006 Aug;38(8):957. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Polster B, Crosier M, Lindsay S, Hayflick S. Expression of PLA2G6 in human
fetal development: Implications for infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy. Brain Res
Bull. 2010 Nov 20;83(6):374-9. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2010.08.011. Epub 2010
Sep 9. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Schneider SA, Hardy J, Bhatia KP. Syndromes of neurodegeneration with brain
iron accumulation (NBIA): an update on clinical presentations, histological and
genetic underpinnings, and treatment considerations. Mov Disord. 2012
Jan;27(1):42-53. doi: 10.1002/mds.23971. Epub 2011 Oct 26. Citation on PubMed Wu Y, Jiang Y, Gao Z, Wang J, Yuan Y, Xiong H, Chang X, Bao X, Zhang Y, Xiao
J, Wu X. Clinical study and PLA2G6 mutation screening analysis in Chinese
patients with infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy. Eur J Neurol. 2009
Feb;16(2):240-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2008.02397.x. Epub 2008 Dec 9. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Degenerative Nerve Diseases Genetic Disorders Optic Nerve Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated September 1, 2012