Trichohepatoenteric syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Trichohepatoenteric syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/trichohepatoenteric-syndrome/ Trichohepatoenteric syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Trichohepatoenteric syndrome is a condition that affects the hair (tricho-), liver (hepato-), and intestines (enteric), as well as other tissues and organs in the body. This condition is also known as syndromic diarrhea because chronic, difficult-to-treat diarrhea is one of its major features. Within the first few weeks of life, affected infants develop watery diarrhea that occurs multiple times per day. Even with nutritional support through intravenous feedings (parenteral nutrition), many of these children experience failure to thrive, which means they do not gain weight or grow at the expected rate. Most children with trichohepatoenteric syndrome are small at birth, and they remain shorter than their peers throughout life. Abnormal hair is another feature of trichohepatoenteric syndrome. Hair in affected individuals is described as wooly, brittle, patchy, and easily pulled out. Under a microscope, some strands of hair can be seen to vary in diameter, with thicker and thinner spots. This feature is known as trichorrhexis nodosa. Other signs and symptoms of trichohepatoenteric syndrome can include liver disease; skin abnormalities; and distinctive facial features, including a wide forehead, a broad base of the nose, and widely spaced eyes. Overall, the facial features are described as "coarse." Most affected individuals also experience immune system abnormalities that can make them prone to developing infections. Less commonly, trichohepatoenteric syndrome is associated with heart (cardiac) abnormalities. Mild intellectual disability has been reported in at least half of all children with the condition. Trichohepatoenteric syndrome is often life-threatening in childhood, particularly in children who develop liver disease or severe infections. Frequency Trichohepatoenteric syndrome is a rare condition with an estimated prevalence of about 1 in 1 million people. At least 44 cases have been reported in the medical literature. Causes Trichohepatoenteric syndrome can be caused by variants (also called mutations) in the SKIC3 or SKIC2 gene. These genes provide instructions for making proteins whose functions have not been confirmed. Researchers speculate that they work together with other proteins within cells to help recognize and break down excess or abnormal messenger RNA (mRNA) molecules. mRNA is a chemical cousin of DNA that serves as the genetic blueprint for protein production. Studies suggest that getting rid of excess and abnormal mRNA is important for cell growth. Variants in the SKIC3 or SKIC2 gene likely eliminate the function of their respective proteins, which is hypothesized to impair the breakdown of unneeded mRNA. However, it is unknown how these changes could lead to chronic diarrhea and the other features of trichohepatoenteric syndrome. Learn more about the genes associated with Trichohepatoenteric syndrome SKIC2 SKIC3 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell must have a variant to cause the disorder. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Diarrhea, fatal infantile, with trichorrhexis nodosa Diarrhea, syndromic Intractable diarrhea with phenotypic anomalies Phenotypic diarrhea of infancy SD/THE Syndromic diarrhea THE syndrome THES Tricho-hepato-enteric syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Trichohepatoenteric syndrome Genetic Testing Registry: Trichohepatoenteric syndrome 2 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Syndromic diarrhea Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM TRICHOHEPATOENTERIC SYNDROME 1; THES1 TRICHOHEPATOENTERIC SYNDROME 2; THES2 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Fabre A, Andre N, Breton A, Broue P, Badens C, Roquelaure B. Intractable
diarrhea with "phenotypic anomalies" and tricho-hepato-enteric syndrome: two
names for the same disorder. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Mar 15;143A(6):584-8. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.31634. Citation on PubMed Fabre A, Breton A, Coste ME, Colomb V, Dubern B, Lachaux A, Lemale J, Mancini
J, Marinier E, Martinez-Vinson C, Peretti N, Perry A, Roquelaure B, Venaille A,
Sarles J, Goulet O, Badens C. Syndromic (phenotypic) diarrhoea of
infancy/tricho-hepato-enteric syndrome. Arch Dis Child. 2014 Jan;99(1):35-8. doi:
10.1136/archdischild-2013-304016. Epub 2013 Oct 9. Citation on PubMed Fabre A, Charroux B, Martinez-Vinson C, Roquelaure B, Odul E, Sayar E, Smith
H, Colomb V, Andre N, Hugot JP, Goulet O, Lacoste C, Sarles J, Royet J, Levy N,
Badens C. SKIV2L mutations cause syndromic diarrhea, or trichohepatoenteric
syndrome. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Apr 6;90(4):689-92. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.02.009. Epub 2012 Mar 22. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Fabre A, Martinez-Vinson C, Goulet O, Badens C. Syndromic
diarrhea/Tricho-hepato-enteric syndrome. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2013 Jan 9;8:5.
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-5. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Fabre A, Martinez-Vinson C, Roquelaure B, Missirian C, Andre N, Breton A,
Lachaux A, Odul E, Colomb V, Lemale J, Cezard JP, Goulet O, Sarles J, Levy N,
Badens C. Novel mutations in TTC37 associated with tricho-hepato-enteric
syndrome. Hum Mutat. 2011 Mar;32(3):277-81. doi: 10.1002/humu.21420. Epub 2011
Feb 17. Citation on PubMed Hartley JL, Zachos NC, Dawood B, Donowitz M, Forman J, Pollitt RJ, Morgan NV,
Tee L, Gissen P, Kahr WH, Knisely AS, Watson S, Chitayat D, Booth IW, Protheroe
S, Murphy S, de Vries E, Kelly DA, Maher ER. Mutations in TTC37 cause
trichohepatoenteric syndrome (phenotypic diarrhea of infancy). Gastroenterology.
2010 Jun;138(7):2388-98, 2398.e1-2. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.02.010. Epub 2010
Feb 20. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Verloes A, Lombet J, Lambert Y, Hubert AF, Deprez M, Fridman V, Gosseye S,
Rigo J, Sokal E. Tricho-hepato-enteric syndrome: further delineation of a
distinct syndrome with neonatal hemochromatosis phenotype, intractable diarrhea,
and hair anomalies. Am J Med Genet. 1997 Feb 11;68(4):391-5. doi:
10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(19970211)68:43.0.co;2-p. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Diarrhea Genetic Disorders Immune System and Disorders Liver Diseases Nutritional Support MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 1, 2014