Aniridia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Aniridia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/aniridia/ Aniridia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Aniridia is an eye disorder characterized by a complete or partial absence of the colored part of the eye (the iris).  These iris abnormalities may cause the pupils to be abnormal or misshapen.  Aniridia can cause reduction in the sharpness of vision (visual acuity) and increased sensitivity to light (photophobia). People with aniridia can also have other eye problems.   Increased pressure in the eye ( glaucoma ) typically appears in late childhood or early adolescence.  Clouding of the lens of the eye ( cataracts ), occur in 50 percent to 85 percent of people with aniridia.  In about 10 percent of affected people, the structures that carry information from the eyes to the brain (optic nerves) are underdeveloped.  Individuals with aniridia may also have involuntary eye movements (nystagmus) or underdevelopment of the region at the back of the eye responsible for sharp central vision (foveal hypoplasia). Many of these eye problems contribute to progressive vision loss in affected individuals.  The severity of symptoms is typically the same in both eyes. Rarely, people with aniridia have behavioral problems, developmental delay, and problems detecting odors. Frequency Aniridia occurs in 1 in 50,000 to 100,000 newborns worldwide. Causes Aniridia is caused by mutations in the PAX6 gene.  The PAX6 gene provides instructions for making a protein that is involved in the early development of the eyes, brain and spinal cord (central nervous system), and the pancreas.  Within the brain, the PAX6 protein is involved in the development of a specialized group of brain cells that process smell ( the olfactory bulb ). The PAX6 protein attaches (binds) to specific regions of DNA and regulates the activity of other genes. On the basis of this role, the PAX6 protein is called a transcription factor.  Following birth, the PAX6 protein regulates several genes that likely contribute to the maintenance of different eye structures . Mutations in the PAX6 gene result in the production of a nonfunctional PAX6 protein that is unable to bind to DNA and regulate the activity of other genes.  A lack of functional PAX6 protein disrupts the formation of the eyes during embryonic development. Learn more about the gene associated with Aniridia PAX6 Inheritance Aniridia is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In approximately two-thirds of cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent .  The remaining one-third of cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Other Names for This Condition Absent iris Congenital aniridia Irideremia Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Aniridia 1 Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital aniridia Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Isolated aniridia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM ANIRIDIA 1; AN1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Chao LY, Huff V, Strong LC, Saunders GF. Mutation in the PAX6 gene in twenty
patients with aniridia. Hum Mutat. 2000;15(4):332-9. doi:
10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(200004)15:43.0.CO;2-1. Citation on PubMed Lee H, Khan R, O'Keefe M. Aniridia: current pathology and management. Acta
Ophthalmol. 2008 Nov;86(7):708-15. doi: 10.1111/j.1755-3768.2008.01427.x. Epub
2008 Oct 6. Citation on PubMed Robinson DO, Howarth RJ, Williamson KA, van Heyningen V, Beal SJ, Crolla JA.
Genetic analysis of chromosome 11p13 and the PAX6 gene in a series of 125 cases
referred with aniridia. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Mar 1;146A(5):558-69. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.32209. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Eye Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 1, 2009