Muenke syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Muenke syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/muenke-syndrome/ Muenke syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Muenke syndrome is a condition characterized by the premature closure of certain bones of the skull (craniosynostosis) during development, which affects the shape of the head and face. Many people with this disorder have a premature fusion of skull bones along the coronal suture , the growth line that goes over the head from ear to ear. Other parts of the skull may also be malformed. These changes can result in an abnormally shaped head, wide-set eyes, and flattened cheekbones. About 5 percent of affected individuals have an enlarged head ( macrocephaly ). People with Muenke syndrome may also have mild abnormalities of the hands or feet, and hearing loss has been observed in some cases. Most people with this condition have normal intellect, but developmental delay and learning problems are possible. The signs and symptoms of Muenke syndrome vary among affected people, and some features overlap with those seen in other craniosynostosis syndromes. A small percentage of people with the gene mutation associated with Muenke syndrome do not have any of the characteristic features of the disorder. Frequency Muenke syndrome occurs in about 1 in 30,000 newborns. This condition accounts for an estimated 4 percent of all cases of craniosynostosis. Causes A particular mutation in the FGFR3 gene causes Muenke syndrome. The FGFR3 gene provides instructions for making a protein that is involved in the development and maintenance of bone and brain tissue. The mutation associated with Muenke syndrome causes the FGFR3 protein to be overly active, which interferes with normal bone growth and allows the bones of the skull to fuse before they should. Learn more about the gene associated with Muenke syndrome FGFR3 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition FGFR3-associated coronal synostosis Muenke nonsyndromic coronal craniosynostosis Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Muenke syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Muenke syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MUENKE SYNDROME; MNKES Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Agochukwu NB, Solomon BD, Muenke M. Impact of genetics on the diagnosis and
clinical management of syndromic craniosynostoses. Childs Nerv Syst. 2012
Sep;28(9):1447-63. doi: 10.1007/s00381-012-1756-2. Epub 2012 Aug 8. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Doherty ES, Lacbawan F, Hadley DW, Brewer C, Zalewski C, Kim HJ, Solomon B,
Rosenbaum K, Domingo DL, Hart TC, Brooks BP, Immken L, Lowry RB, Kimonis V,
Shanske AL, Jehee FS, Bueno MR, Knightly C, McDonald-McGinn D, Zackai EH, Muenke
M. Muenke syndrome (FGFR3-related craniosynostosis): expansion of the phenotype
and review of the literature. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Dec 15;143A(24):3204-15.
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32078. Citation on PubMed Kruszka P, Addissie YA, Yarnell CM, Hadley DW, Guillen Sacoto MJ, Platte P,
Paelecke Y, Collmann H, Snow N, Schweitzer T, Boyadjiev SA, Aravidis C, Hall SE,
Mulliken JB, Roscioli T, Muenke M. Muenke syndrome: An international multicenter
natural history study. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Apr;170A(4):918-29. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.37528. Epub 2016 Jan 6. Citation on PubMed Kruszka P, Rolle M, Kahle KT, Muenke M. Muenke Syndrome. 2006 May 10 [updated
2023 Mar 30]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A,
editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of
Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1415/ Citation on PubMed Sabatino G, Di Rocco F, Zampino G, Tamburrini G, Caldarelli M, Di Rocco C.
Muenke syndrome. Childs Nerv Syst. 2004 May;20(5):297-301. doi:
10.1007/s00381-003-0906-y. Epub 2004 Feb 10. Citation on PubMed Vajo Z, Francomano CA, Wilkin DJ. The molecular and genetic basis of
fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 disorders: the achondroplasia family of
skeletal dysplasias, Muenke craniosynostosis, and Crouzon syndrome with
acanthosis nigricans. Endocr Rev. 2000 Feb;21(1):23-39. doi:
10.1210/edrv.21.1.0387. Citation on PubMed Wenger T, Miller D, Evans K. FGFR Craniosynostosis Syndromes
Overview. 1998 Oct 20 [updated 2020 Apr 30]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM,
Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1455/ Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Craniofacial Abnormalities Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Craniosynostosis Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 1, 2019