Benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/benign-recurrent-intrahepatic-cholestasis/ Benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis (BRIC) is characterized by episodes of liver dysfunction called cholestasis. During these episodes, the liver cells have a reduced ability to release a digestive fluid called bile. Because the problems with bile release occur within the liver (intrahepatic), the condition is described as intrahepatic cholestasis. Episodes of cholestasis can last from weeks to months, and the time between episodes, during which there are usually no symptoms, can vary from weeks to years. The first episode of cholestasis usually occurs in an affected person's teens or twenties. An attack typically begins with severe itchiness (pruritus), followed by yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice) a few weeks later. Other general signs and symptoms that occur during these episodes include a vague feeling of discomfort (malaise), irritability, nausea, vomiting, and a lack of appetite. A common feature of BRIC is the reduced absorption of fat in the body, which leads to excess fat in the feces (steatorrhea). Because of a lack of fat absorption and loss of appetite, affected individuals often lose weight during episodes of cholestasis. BRIC is divided into two types, BRIC1 and BRIC2, based on the genetic cause of the condition. The signs and symptoms are the same in both types. This condition is called benign because it does not cause lasting damage to the liver. However, episodes of liver dysfunction occasionally develop into a more severe, permanent form of liver disease known as progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC). BRIC and PFIC are sometimes considered to be part of a spectrum of intrahepatic cholestasis disorders of varying severity. Frequency BRIC is a rare disorder. Although the prevalence is unknown, this condition is less common than the related disorder PFIC, which affects approximately 1 in 50,000 to 100,000 people worldwide. Causes Mutations in the ATP8B1 gene cause benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis type 1 (BRIC1), and mutations in the ABCB11 gene cause benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis type 2 (BRIC2). These two genes are involved in the release (secretion) of bile, a fluid produced by the liver that helps digest fats. The ATP8B1 gene provides instructions for making a protein that helps to control the distribution of certain fats, called lipids, in the membranes of liver cells. This function likely plays a role in maintaining an appropriate balance of bile acids, a component of bile. This process, known as bile acid homeostasis, is critical for the normal secretion of bile and the proper functioning of liver cells. Although the mechanism is unclear, mutations in the ATP8B1 gene result in the buildup of bile acids in liver cells. The imbalance of bile acids leads to the signs and symptoms of BRIC1. The ABCB11 gene provides instructions for making a protein called the bile salt export pump (BSEP). This protein is found in the liver, and its main role is to move bile salts (a component of bile) out of liver cells. Mutations in the ABCB11 gene result in a reduction of BSEP function. This reduction leads to a decrease of bile salt secretion, which causes the features of BRIC2. The factors that trigger episodes of BRIC are unknown. Some people with BRIC do not have a mutation in the ATP8B1 or ABCB11 gene. In these individuals, the cause of the condition is unknown. Learn more about the genes associated with Benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis ABCB11 ATP8B1 Inheritance Both types of BRIC are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Some people with BRIC have no family history of the disorder. These cases arise from mutations in the ATP8B1 or ABCB11 gene that occur in the body's cells after conception and are not inherited. Other Names for This Condition ABCB11-related intrahepatic cholestasis ATP8B1-related intrahepatic cholestasis BRIC Low gamma-GT familial intrahepatic cholestasis Recurrent familial intrahepatic cholestasis Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis type 2 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis type 1 Benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis type 2 Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CHOLESTASIS, BENIGN RECURRENT INTRAHEPATIC, 1; BRIC1 CHOLESTASIS, BENIGN RECURRENT INTRAHEPATIC, 2; BRIC2 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Folmer DE, van der Mark VA, Ho-Mok KS, Oude Elferink RP, Paulusma CC.
Differential effects of progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 1 and
benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis type 1 mutations on canalicular
localization of ATP8B1. Hepatology. 2009 Nov;50(5):1597-605. doi:
10.1002/hep.23158. Citation on PubMed Kagawa T, Watanabe N, Mochizuki K, Numari A, Ikeno Y, Itoh J, Tanaka H, Arias
IM, Mine T. Phenotypic differences in PFIC2 and BRIC2 correlate with protein
stability of mutant Bsep and impaired taurocholate secretion in MDCK II cells. Am
J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2008 Jan;294(1):G58-67. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00367.2007. Epub 2007 Oct 18. Citation on PubMed Klomp LW, Vargas JC, van Mil SW, Pawlikowska L, Strautnieks SS, van Eijk MJ,
Juijn JA, Pabon-Pena C, Smith LB, DeYoung JA, Byrne JA, Gombert J, van der Brugge
G, Berger R, Jankowska I, Pawlowska J, Villa E, Knisely AS, Thompson RJ, Freimer
NB, Houwen RH, Bull LN. Characterization of mutations in ATP8B1 associated with
hereditary cholestasis. Hepatology. 2004 Jul;40(1):27-38. doi: 10.1002/hep.20285. Citation on PubMed Lam P, Pearson CL, Soroka CJ, Xu S, Mennone A, Boyer JL. Levels of plasma
membrane expression in progressive and benign mutations of the bile salt export
pump (Bsep/Abcb11) correlate with severity of cholestatic diseases. Am J Physiol
Cell Physiol. 2007 Nov;293(5):C1709-16. doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00327.2007. Epub
2007 Sep 13. Citation on PubMed Luketic VA, Shiffman ML. Benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis. Clin Liver
Dis. 2004 Feb;8(1):133-49, vii. doi: 10.1016/S1089-3261(03)00133-8. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Jaundice Liver Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Cholestasis Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated April 1, 2012