Maffucci syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Maffucci syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/maffucci-syndrome/ Maffucci syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Maffucci syndrome is a disorder that primarily affects the bones and skin. It is characterized by multiple enchondromas, which are noncancerous (benign) growths of cartilage that develop within the bones. These growths most commonly occur in the limb bones, especially in the bones of the hands and feet; however, they may also occur in the skull, ribs, and bones of the spine (vertebrae). Enchondromas may result in severe bone deformities, shortening of the limbs, and fractures. The signs and symptoms of Maffucci syndrome may be detectable at birth, although they generally do not become apparent until around the age of 5. Enchondromas develop near the ends of bones, where normal growth occurs, and they frequently stop forming after affected individuals stop growing in early adulthood. As a result of the bone deformities associated with Maffucci syndrome, people with this disorder generally have short stature and underdeveloped muscles. Maffucci syndrome is distinguished from a similar disorder that involves enchondromas ( Ollier disease ) by the presence of red or purplish growths in the skin consisting of tangles of abnormal blood vessels (hemangiomas). In addition to hemangiomas, individuals with Maffucci syndrome occasionally also have lymphangiomas, which are masses made up of the thin tubes that carry lymph fluid (lymphatic vessels). These growths may appear anywhere on the body. Although the enchondromas associated with Maffucci syndrome start out as benign, they may become cancerous (malignant). In particular, affected individuals may develop bone cancers called chondrosarcomas, especially in the skull. People with Maffucci syndrome also have an increased risk of other cancers, such as ovarian or liver cancer . People with Maffucci syndrome usually have a normal lifespan, and intelligence is unaffected. The extent of their physical impairment depends on their individual skeletal deformities, but in most cases they have no major limitations in their activities. Frequency Maffucci syndrome is very rare. Since it was first described in 1881, fewer than 200 cases have been reported worldwide. Causes In most people with Maffucci syndrome, the disorder is caused by mutations in the IDH1 or IDH2 gene. These genes provide instructions for making enzymes called isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and isocitrate dehydrogenase 2, respectively. These enzymes convert a compound called isocitrate to another compound called 2-ketoglutarate. This reaction also produces a molecule called NADPH, which is necessary for many cellular processes. IDH1 or IDH2 gene mutations cause the enzyme produced from the respective gene to take on a new, abnormal function. Although these mutations have been found in some cells of enchondromas and hemangiomas in people with Maffucci syndrome, the relationship between the mutations and the signs and symptoms of the disorder is not well understood. Mutations in other genes may also account for some cases of Maffucci syndrome. Learn more about the genes associated with Maffucci syndrome IDH1 IDH2 Inheritance Maffucci syndrome is not inherited. The mutations that cause this disorder are somatic, which means they occur during a person's lifetime. A somatic mutation occurs in a single cell. As that cell continues to grow and divide, the cells derived from it also have the same mutation. In Maffucci syndrome, the mutation is thought to occur in a cell during early development before birth; cells that arise from that abnormal cell have the mutation, while the body's other cells do not. This situation is called mosaicism . Other Names for This Condition Chondrodysplasia with hemangioma Chondroplasia angiomatosis Dyschondroplasia and cavernous hemangioma Enchondromatosis with hemangiomata Hemangiomata with dyschondroplasia Hemangiomatosis chondrodystrophica Kast syndrome Multiple angiomas and endochondromas Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Maffucci syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Maffucci syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MULTIPLE ENCHONDROMATOSIS, MAFFUCCI TYPE Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Amary MF, Damato S, Halai D, Eskandarpour M, Berisha F, Bonar F, McCarthy S,
Fantin VR, Straley KS, Lobo S, Aston W, Green CL, Gale RE, Tirabosco R, Futreal
A, Campbell P, Presneau N, Flanagan AM. Ollier disease and Maffucci syndrome are
caused by somatic mosaic mutations of IDH1 and IDH2. Nat Genet. 2011 Nov
6;43(12):1262-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.994. Citation on PubMed Amyere M, Dompmartin A, Wouters V, Enjolras O, Kaitila I, Docquier PL,
Godfraind C, Mulliken JB, Boon LM, Vikkula M. Common somatic alterations
identified in maffucci syndrome by molecular karyotyping. Mol Syndromol. 2014
Dec;5(6):259-67. doi: 10.1159/000365898. Epub 2014 Aug 26. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Gupta N, Kabra M. Maffucci syndrome. Indian Pediatr. 2007 Feb;44(2):149-50. No
abstract available. Citation on PubMed Herget GW, Strohm P, Rottenburger C, Kontny U, Krauss T, Bohm J, Sudkamp N, Uhl
M. Insights into Enchondroma, Enchondromatosis and the risk of secondary
Chondrosarcoma. Review of the literature with an emphasis on the clinical
behaviour, radiology, malignant transformation and the follow up. Neoplasma.
2014;61(4):365-78. doi: 10.4149/neo_2014_046. Citation on PubMed Pansuriya TC, Kroon HM, Bovee JV. Enchondromatosis: insights on the different
subtypes. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2010 Jun 26;3(6):557-69. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Pansuriya TC, van Eijk R, d'Adamo P, van Ruler MA, Kuijjer ML, Oosting J,
Cleton-Jansen AM, van Oosterwijk JG, Verbeke SL, Meijer D, van Wezel T, Nord KH,
Sangiorgi L, Toker B, Liegl-Atzwanger B, San-Julian M, Sciot R, Limaye N,
Kindblom LG, Daugaard S, Godfraind C, Boon LM, Vikkula M, Kurek KC, Szuhai K,
French PJ, Bovee JV. Somatic mosaic IDH1 and IDH2 mutations are associated with
enchondroma and spindle cell hemangioma in Ollier disease and Maffucci syndrome.
Nat Genet. 2011 Nov 6;43(12):1256-61. doi: 10.1038/ng.1004. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Ranger A, Szymczak A. Do intracranial neoplasms differ in Ollier disease and
maffucci syndrome? An in-depth analysis of the literature. Neurosurgery. 2009
Dec;65(6):1106-13; discussion 1113-5. doi: 10.1227/01.NEU.0000356984.92242.D5. Citation on PubMed Superti-Furga A, Spranger J, Nishimura G. Enchondromatosis revisited: new
classification with molecular basis. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2012 Aug
15;160C(3):154-64. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31331. Epub 2012 Jul 12. Citation on PubMed Verdegaal SH, Bovee JV, Pansuriya TC, Grimer RJ, Ozger H, Jutte PC, San Julian
M, Biau DJ, van der Geest IC, Leithner A, Streitburger A, Klenke FM, Gouin FG,
Campanacci DA, Marec-Berard P, Hogendoorn PC, Brand R, Taminiau AH. Incidence,
predictive factors, and prognosis of chondrosarcoma in patients with Ollier
disease and Maffucci syndrome: an international multicenter study of 161
patients. Oncologist. 2011;16(12):1771-9. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2011-0200.
Epub 2011 Dec 6. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Bone Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Hemangioma Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2016