Crigler-Najjar syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Crigler-Najjar syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/crigler-najjar-syndrome/ Crigler-Najjar syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Crigler-Najjar syndrome is a severe condition characterized by high levels of a toxic substance called bilirubin in the blood (hyperbilirubinemia). Bilirubin is produced when red blood cells are broken down. This substance is removed from the body only after it undergoes a chemical reaction in the liver, which converts the toxic form of bilirubin (called unconjugated bilirubin) to a nontoxic form called conjugated bilirubin. People with Crigler-Najjar syndrome have a buildup of unconjugated bilirubin in their blood (unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia). Bilirubin has an orange-yellow tint, and hyperbilirubinemia causes yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice). In Crigler-Najjar syndrome, jaundice is apparent at birth or in infancy. Severe unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia can lead to a condition called kernicterus, which is a form of brain damage caused by the accumulation of unconjugated bilirubin in the brain and nerve tissues. Babies with kernicterus are often extremely tired (lethargic) and may have weak muscle tone (hypotonia). These babies may experience episodes of increased muscle tone (hypertonia) and arching of their backs. Kernicterus can lead to other neurological problems, including involuntary writhing movements of the body (choreoathetosis), hearing problems, or intellectual disability. Crigler-Najjar syndrome is divided into two types. Type 1 (CN1) is very severe, and affected individuals can die in childhood due to kernicterus, although with proper treatment, they may survive longer. Type 2 (CN2) is less severe. People with CN2 are less likely to develop kernicterus, and most affected individuals survive into adulthood. Frequency Crigler-Najjar syndrome is estimated to affect fewer than 1 in 1 million newborns worldwide. Causes Mutations in the UGT1A1 gene cause Crigler-Najjar syndrome. This gene provides instructions for making the bilirubin uridine diphosphate glucuronosyl transferase (bilirubin-UGT) enzyme, which is found primarily in liver cells and is necessary for the removal of bilirubin from the body. The bilirubin-UGT enzyme performs a chemical reaction called glucuronidation. During this reaction, the enzyme transfers a compound called glucuronic acid to unconjugated bilirubin, converting it to conjugated bilirubin. Glucuronidation makes bilirubin dissolvable in water so that it can be removed from the body. Mutations in the UGT1A1 gene that cause Crigler-Najjar syndrome result in reduced or absent function of the bilirubin-UGT enzyme. People with CN1 have no enzyme function, while people with CN2 have less than 20 percent of normal function. The loss of bilirubin-UGT function decreases glucuronidation of unconjugated bilirubin. This toxic substance then builds up in the body, causing unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia and jaundice. Learn more about the gene associated with Crigler-Najjar syndrome UGT1A1 Inheritance Crigler-Najjar syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the UGT1A1 gene in each cell have mutations. A less severe condition called Gilbert syndrome can occur when one copy of the UGT1A1 gene has a mutation. Other Names for This Condition Crigler Najjar syndrome Familial nonhemolytic unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia Hereditary unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Crigler-Najjar syndrome, type II Genetic Testing Registry: Crigler-Najjar syndrome type 1 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Crigler-Najjar syndrome type 1 Crigler-Najjar syndrome type 2 Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CRIGLER-NAJJAR SYNDROME, TYPE I CRIGLER-NAJJAR SYNDROME, TYPE II Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bosma PJ. Inherited disorders of bilirubin metabolism. J Hepatol. 2003
Jan;38(1):107-17. doi: 10.1016/s0168-8278(02)00359-8. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Servedio V, d'Apolito M, Maiorano N, Minuti B, Torricelli F, Ronchi F, Zancan
L, Perrotta S, Vajro P, Boschetto L, Iolascon A. Spectrum of UGT1A1 mutations in
Crigler-Najjar (CN) syndrome patients: identification of twelve novel alleles and
genotype-phenotype correlation. Hum Mutat. 2005 Mar;25(3):325. doi:
10.1002/humu.9322. Citation on PubMed Sneitz N, Bakker CT, de Knegt RJ, Halley DJ, Finel M, Bosma PJ. Crigler-Najjar
syndrome in The Netherlands: identification of four novel UGT1A1 alleles,
genotype-phenotype correlation, and functional analysis of 10 missense mutants.
Hum Mutat. 2010 Jan;31(1):52-9. doi: 10.1002/humu.21133. Citation on PubMed Udomuksorn W, Elliot DJ, Lewis BC, Mackenzie PI, Yoovathaworn K, Miners JO.
Influence of mutations associated with Gilbert and Crigler-Najjar type II
syndromes on the glucuronidation kinetics of bilirubin and other
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A substrates. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2007
Dec;17(12):1017-29. doi: 10.1097/FPC.0b013e328256b1b6. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Jaundice Liver Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Bilirubin blood test Bilirubin encephalopathy Genetics Related Medical Tests Bilirubin Blood Test Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2012