Adenosine deaminase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Adenosine deaminase deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/adenosine-deaminase-deficiency/ Adenosine deaminase deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency is a disorder that affects the immune system. Specifically, ADA deficiency impairs the development and function of immune cells called lymphocytes. Lymphocytes are white blood cells that help the body fight infections. As a result, people with ADA deficiency often develop pneumonia, chronic diarrhea, and widespread skin rashes. Additional signs and symptoms of ADA deficiency include slow growth and developmental delays. About 80 percent of individuals with ADA deficiency also have severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID). People with SCID lack virtually all immune protection from bacteria, viruses, and fungi. They are prone to repeated and persistent infections that can be serious or life-threatening. These infections are often caused by "opportunistic" organisms that ordinarily do not cause illness in people with a normal immune system. People with ADA deficiency with SCID (ADA-SCID) typically develop health problems within the first 6 months of life. Without treatment, these babies usually do not survive past age 2. About 15 to 20 percent of people with ADA deficiency develop health problems that begin between 1 and 10 years of age (delayed onset) or in adulthood (late onset). In people with this form of ADA deficiency (known as delayed or late-onset combined immunodeficiency or ADA-CID), the immune deficiency tends to be less severe than in people with ADA-SCID. People with ADA-CID typically have recurrent upper respiratory and ear infections. Over time, affected individuals may develop chronic lung damage, malnutrition, and other health problems. In some individuals, ADA deficiency only impacts red blood cells. Since white blood cells are not affected, these individuals have normal immune systems. This form of the condition is known as partial ADA deficiency. Individuals with this form do not have any health problems related to the condition. They often only find out they have ADA deficiency when they undergo testing because of an affected relative or during a normal health screening. Frequency Adenosine deaminase deficiency is very rare. It is estimated to occur in approximately 1 in 500,000  newborns worldwide. Approximately 15 percent of people with SCID have ADA deficiency. Causes Adenosine deaminase deficiency is caused by variants (also called mutations) in the ADA gene. This gene provides instructions for producing the enzyme adenosine deaminase. This enzyme is found throughout the body but is most active in lymphocytes. These cells protect the body against foreign invaders, such as bacteria and viruses. Lymphocytes are produced in specialized lymphoid tissues throughout the body, including in a gland located behind the breastbone called the thymus and in the lymph nodes. The adenosine deaminase enzyme works to get rid of a molecule called deoxyadenosine, which is generated when DNA is broken down. A buildup of deoxyadenosine in cells can lead to early cell death. Adenosine deaminase converts deoxyadenosine to another molecule called deoxyinosine, which is not harmful. Variants in the ADA gene reduce or eliminate the activity of adenosine deaminase and allow deoxyadenosine to build up in cells. The severity of ADA deficiency generally depends on how much working enzyme is available. Individuals with ADA-SCID have no enzyme activity. Those with ADA-CID have greatly reduced enzyme activity, and people with partial ADA deficiency  have somewhat reduced enzyme activity. Immature lymphocytes in the thymus are particularly vulnerable to a toxic buildup of deoxyadenosine. These cells die before they can mature and help fight infection. The number of lymphocytes in other lymphoid tissues is also greatly reduced. The loss of infection-fighting cells results in the signs and symptoms of ADA deficiency. Learn more about the gene associated with Adenosine deaminase deficiency ADA Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell must have a variant to cause the disorder. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition ADA deficiency ADA-Related Immune Deficiency, Adenosine Deaminase 1 Deficiency ADA-SCID ADA1 Deficiency Adenosine deaminase deficient severe combined immunodeficiency SCID due to ADA deficiency Severe combined immunodeficiency due to ADA deficiency Severe combined immunodeficiency, autosomal recessive, T cell-negative, B cell-negative, NK cell-negative, due to adenosine deaminase deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Severe combined immunodeficiency, autosomal recessive, T cell-negative, B cell-negative, NK cell-negative, due to adenosine deaminase deficiency Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Severe combined immunodeficiency due to adenosine deaminase deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM SEVERE COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, T CELL-NEGATIVE, B CELL-NEGATIVE, NK CELL-NEGATIVE, DUE TO ADENOSINE DEAMINASE DEFICIENCY Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Blackburn MR, Thompson LF. Adenosine deaminase deficiency: unanticipated
benefits from the study of a rare immunodeficiency. J Immunol. 2012 Feb
1;188(3):933-5. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103519. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Dabrowska-Leonik N, Piatosa B, Slominska E, Bohynikova N, Bernat-Sitarz K,
Bernatowska E, Wolska-Kusnierz B, Kalwak K, Koltan S, Dabrowska A, Gozdzik J,
Ussowicz M, Pac M. National experience with adenosine deaminase deficiency
related SCID in Polish children. Front Immunol. 2023 Jan 6;13:1058623. doi:
10.3389/fimmu.2022.1058623. eCollection 2022. Citation on PubMed Grunebaum E, Booth C, Cuvelier GDE, Loves R, Aiuti A, Kohn DB. Updated
Management Guidelines for Adenosine Deaminase Deficiency. J Allergy Clin Immunol
Pract. 2023 Jun;11(6):1665-1675. doi: 10.1016/j.jaip.2023.01.032. Epub 2023 Feb
1. Citation on PubMed Hershfield M, Tarrant T. Adenosine Deaminase Deficiency. 2006 Oct 3 [updated
2024 Mar 7]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A,
editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of
Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1483/ Citation on PubMed Hershfield MS. Genotype is an important determinant of phenotype in adenosine
deaminase deficiency. Curr Opin Immunol. 2003 Oct;15(5):571-7. doi:
10.1016/s0952-7915(03)00104-3. Citation on PubMed Hershfield MS. New insights into adenosine-receptor-mediated immunosuppression
and the role of adenosine in causing the immunodeficiency associated with
adenosine deaminase deficiency. Eur J Immunol. 2005 Jan;35(1):25-30. doi:
10.1002/eji.200425738. Citation on PubMed Nofech-Mozes Y, Blaser SI, Kobayashi J, Grunebaum E, Roifman CM. Neurologic
abnormalities in patients with adenosine deaminase deficiency. Pediatr Neurol.
2007 Sep;37(3):218-21. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2007.03.011. Citation on PubMed Nyhan WL. Disorders of purine and pyrimidine metabolism. Mol Genet Metab. 2005
Sep-Oct;86(1-2):25-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2005.07.027. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Immune System and Disorders Newborn Screening MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Immunodeficiency disorders Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated May 21, 2024