TK2-related mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome, myopathic form: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → TK2-related mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome, myopathic form URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/tk2-related-mitochondrial-dna-depletion-syndrome-myopathic-form/ TK2-related mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome, myopathic form To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description TK2 -related mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome, myopathic form ( TK2 -MDS) is an inherited condition that causes progressive muscle weakness (myopathy). The signs and symptoms of TK2 -MDS typically begin in early childhood. Development is usually normal early in life, but as muscle weakness progresses, people with TK2 -MDS lose motor skills such as standing, walking, eating, and talking. Some affected individuals have increasing weakness in the muscles that control eye movement, leading to droopy eyelids ( progressive external ophthalmoplegia ). Most often in TK2 -MDS, the muscles are the only affected tissues; however, the liver may be enlarged (hepatomegaly), seizures can occur, and hearing loss caused by nerve damage in the inner ear (sensorineural hearing loss) may be present. Intelligence is usually not affected. As the disorder worsens, the muscles that control breathing become weakened and affected individuals frequently have to rely on mechanical ventilation. Respiratory failure is the most common cause of death in people with TK2 -MDS, often occurring in childhood. Rarely, the disorder progresses slowly and affected individuals survive into adolescence or adulthood. Frequency The prevalence of TK2 -MDS is unknown. Approximately 45 cases have been described. Causes As the condition name suggests, mutations in the TK2 gene cause TK2 -MDS. The TK2 gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called thymidine kinase 2 that functions within cell structures called mitochondria , which are found in all tissues. Mitochondria are involved in a wide variety of cellular activities, including energy production; chemical signaling; and regulation of cell growth, cell division, and cell death. Mitochondria contain their own genetic material, known as mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), which is essential for the normal function of these structures. Thymidine kinase 2 is involved in the production and maintenance of mtDNA. Specifically, this enzyme plays a role in recycling mtDNA building blocks (nucleotides) so that errors in mtDNA sequencing can be repaired and new mtDNA molecules can be produced. Mutations in the TK2 gene reduce the production or activity of thymidine kinase 2. A decrease in enzyme activity impairs recycling of mtDNA nucleotides, causing a shortage of nucleotides available for the repair and production of mtDNA molecules.  A reduction in the amount of mtDNA (known as mtDNA depletion) impairs mitochondrial function. Greater mtDNA depletion tends to cause more severe signs and symptoms. The muscle cells of people with TK2 -MDS have very low amounts of mtDNA, ranging from 5 to 30 percent of normal. Other tissues can have 60 percent of normal to normal amounts of mtDNA. It is unclear why TK2 gene mutations typically affect only muscle tissue, but the high energy demands of muscle cells may make them the most susceptible to cell death when mtDNA is lost and less energy is produced in cells. The brain and the liver also have high energy demands, which may explain why these organs are affected in severe cases of TK2 -MDS. Learn more about the gene associated with TK2-related mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome, myopathic form TK2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome 2 (myopathic type) MTDPS2 TK2-related mitochondrial DNA depletion myopathy Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome, myopathic form Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MITOCHONDRIAL DNA DEPLETION SYNDROME 2 (MYOPATHIC TYPE); MTDPS2 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Behin A, Jardel C, Claeys KG, Fagart J, Louha M, Romero NB, Laforet P, Eymard
B, Lombes A. Adult cases of mitochondrial DNA depletion due to TK2 defect: an
expanding spectrum. Neurology. 2012 Feb 28;78(9):644-8. doi:
10.1212/WNL.0b013e318248df2b. Epub 2012 Feb 15. Citation on PubMed Blakely E, He L, Gardner JL, Hudson G, Walter J, Hughes I, Turnbull DM, Taylor
RW. Novel mutations in the TK2 gene associated with fatal mitochondrial DNA
depletion myopathy. Neuromuscul Disord. 2008 Jul;18(7):557-60. doi:
10.1016/j.nmd.2008.04.014. Epub 2008 May 27. Citation on PubMed Gotz A, Isohanni P, Pihko H, Paetau A, Herva R, Saarenpaa-Heikkila O, Valanne
L, Marjavaara S, Suomalainen A. Thymidine kinase 2 defects can cause multi-tissue
mtDNA depletion syndrome. Brain. 2008 Nov;131(Pt 11):2841-50. doi:
10.1093/brain/awn236. Epub 2008 Sep 26. Citation on PubMed Lesko N, Naess K, Wibom R, Solaroli N, Nennesmo I, von Dobeln U, Karlsson A,
Larsson NG. Two novel mutations in thymidine kinase-2 cause early onset fatal
encephalomyopathy and severe mtDNA depletion. Neuromuscul Disord. 2010
Mar;20(3):198-203. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2009.11.013. Epub 2010 Jan 18. Citation on PubMed Marti R, Nascimento A, Colomer J, Lara MC, Lopez-Gallardo E, Ruiz-Pesini E,
Montoya J, Andreu AL, Briones P, Pineda M. Hearing loss in a patient with the
myopathic form of mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome and a novel mutation in
the TK2 gene. Pediatr Res. 2010 Aug;68(2):151-4. doi:
10.1203/PDR.0b013e3181e33bbe. Erratum In: Pediatr Res. 2010 Nov;68(5):451. Citation on PubMed Oskoui M, Davidzon G, Pascual J, Erazo R, Gurgel-Giannetti J, Krishna S,
Bonilla E, De Vivo DC, Shanske S, DiMauro S. Clinical spectrum of mitochondrial
DNA depletion due to mutations in the thymidine kinase 2 gene. Arch Neurol. 2006
Aug;63(8):1122-6. doi: 10.1001/archneur.63.8.1122. Citation on PubMed Paradas C, Gutierrez Rios P, Rivas E, Carbonell P, Hirano M, DiMauro S. TK2
mutation presenting as indolent myopathy. Neurology. 2013 Jan 29;80(5):504-6.
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31827f0ff7. Epub 2013 Jan 9. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Mitochondrial Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated September 1, 2013