Thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anemia syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anemia syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/thiamine-responsive-megaloblastic-anemia-syndrome/ Thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anemia syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anemia syndrome (TRMA) is a rare condition that is characterized by hearing loss, diabetes, and a blood disorder called megaloblastic anemia. Megaloblastic anemia occurs when a person has a low number of red blood cells (anemia), and the red blood cells that are present are larger than normal (megaloblastic). The symptoms of this blood disorder may include decreased appetite, lack of energy, headaches, pale skin, diarrhea, and tingling or numbness in the hands and feet. Individuals with TRMA typically develop megaloblastic anemia between infancy and adolescence. TRMA is called "thiamine-responsive" because the anemia can be treated with daily doses of vitamin B1 (thiamine). In people with TRMA, hearing loss typically develops during early childhood and is caused by abnormalities of the inner ear (sensorineural hearing loss). The hearing loss usually worsens over time. It remains unclear whether treatment with thiamine can improve hearing or delay hearing loss in people with TRMA. People with TRMA often develop diabetes mellitus, a condition in which glucose levels can become dangerously high, at an early age. Although some individuals with TRMA develop diabetes during childhood, they do not have the autoimmune form of diabetes that typically develops in children, called type 1 diabetes . People with TRMA usually require insulin to treat their diabetes . In some cases, treatment with thiamine may delay the onset of diabetes or reduce the amount of insulin a person needs. Some individuals with TRMA have abnormalities of the eye, including optic atrophy, which is the degeneration (atrophy) of the nerves that carry information from the eyes to the brain . Additional features of this condition may include heart and blood vessel (cardiovascular) problems, intellectual disabilities, behavioral changes, and seizures. Frequency TRMA is rare, though its exact prevalence is unknown. Approximately 200 individuals with this condition have been described in the medical literature. Causes Variants (also called mutations) in the SLC19A2 gene cause TRMA. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called thiamine transporter 1, which transports thiamine into cells. Thiamine is found in many different foods and is important for numerous body functions. Most variants in the SLC19A2 gene lead to the production of an abnormally short, nonfunctional version of thiamine transporter 1. Other variants change single protein building blocks ( amino acids ) in thiamine transporter 1. All of these variants disrupt the protein's ability to bring thiamine into the cell. TRMA is treated with daily doses of thiamine because some thiamine can pass into the cell without the help of a transporter when the vitamin is present in large amounts. It remains unclear exactly how variants in the SLC19A2 gene cause the specific set of features seen in people with TRMA. Research suggests that an alternative transporter made by a different gene is available to transport thiamine in many tissues of the body. However, this alternative transporter may not be as active in the inner ear , the bone marrow (where blood cells are made), and the pancreas (where insulin is made), which would explain why these tissues are affected in people with TRMA. Learn more about the gene associated with Thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anemia syndrome SLC19A2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell must have a variant to cause the disorder. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Rogers syndrome Thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anemia with diabetes mellitus and sensorineural hearing loss TRMA Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Megaloblastic anemia, thiamine-responsive, with diabetes mellitus and sensorineural deafness Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anemia syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM THIAMINE-RESPONSIVE MEGALOBLASTIC ANEMIA SYNDROME; TRMA Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Baron D, Assaraf YG, Cohen N, Aronheim A. Lack of plasma membrane targeting of
a G172D mutant thiamine transporter derived from Rogers syndrome family. Mol Med.
2002 Aug;8(8):462-74. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Diaz GA, Banikazemi M, Oishi K, Desnick RJ, Gelb BD. Mutations in a new gene
encoding a thiamine transporter cause thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anaemia
syndrome. Nat Genet. 1999 Jul;22(3):309-12. doi: 10.1038/10385. Citation on PubMed Habeb AM, Flanagan SE, Zulali MA, Abdullah MA, Pomahacova R, Boyadzhiev V,
Colindres LE, Godoy GV, Vasanthi T, Al Saif R, Setoodeh A, Haghighi A, Haghighi
A, Shaalan Y; International Neonatal Diabetes Consortium; Hattersley AT, Ellard
S, De Franco E. Pharmacogenomics in diabetes: outcomes of thiamine therapy in
TRMA syndrome. Diabetologia. 2018 May;61(5):1027-1036. doi:
10.1007/s00125-018-4554-x. Epub 2018 Feb 15. Citation on PubMed Liberman MC, Tartaglini E, Fleming JC, Neufeld EJ. Deletion of SLC19A2, the
high affinity thiamine transporter, causes selective inner hair cell loss and an
auditory neuropathy phenotype. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2006 Sep;7(3):211-7. doi:
10.1007/s10162-006-0035-x. Epub 2006 Apr 27. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Lorber A, Gazit AZ, Khoury A, Schwartz Y, Mandel H. Cardiac manifestations in
thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anemia syndrome. Pediatr Cardiol. 2003
Sep-Oct;24(5):476-81. doi: 10.1007/s00246-002-0215-3. Citation on PubMed Olsen BS, Hahnemann JM, Schwartz M, Ostergaard E. Thiamine-responsive
megaloblastic anaemia: a cause of syndromic diabetes in childhood. Pediatr
Diabetes. 2007 Aug;8(4):239-41. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-5448.2007.00251.x. Citation on PubMed Ricketts CJ, Minton JA, Samuel J, Ariyawansa I, Wales JK, Lo IF, Barrett TG.
Thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anaemia syndrome: long-term follow-up and
mutation analysis of seven families. Acta Paediatr. 2006 Jan;95(1):99-104. doi:
10.1080/08035250500323715. Citation on PubMed Sako S, Tsunogai T, Oishi K. Thiamine-Responsive Megaloblastic Anemia
Syndrome. 2003 Oct 24 [updated 2022 Jul 28]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM,
Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1282/ Citation on PubMed Zhang S, Qiao Y, Wang Z, Zhuang J, Sun Y, Shang X, Li G. Identification of
novel compound heterozygous variants in SLC19A2 and the genotype-phenotype
associations in thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anemia. Clin Chim Acta. 2021
May;516:157-168. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2021.01.025. Epub 2021 Feb 9. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Anemia Diabetes Genetic Disorders Hearing Problems in Children MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Megaloblastic Anemia (Image) Optic nerve atrophy Thiamin Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 9, 2024