Warsaw breakage syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Warsaw breakage syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/warsaw-breakage-syndrome/ Warsaw breakage syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Warsaw breakage syndrome is a condition that can cause multiple abnormalities. People with Warsaw breakage syndrome have intellectual disability that varies from mild to severe. They also have impaired growth from birth leading to short stature and a small head size ( microcephaly ). Affected individuals have distinctive facial features that may include a small forehead, a short nose, a small lower jaw, a flat area between the nose and mouth (philtrum), and prominent cheeks. Other common features include hearing loss caused by nerve damage in the inner ear (sensorineural hearing loss) and heart malformations. Frequency Warsaw breakage syndrome is a rare condition; at least four cases have been described in the medical literature. Causes Mutations in the DDX11 gene cause Warsaw breakage syndrome. The DDX11 gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called ChlR1. This enzyme functions as a helicase. Helicases are enzymes that attach (bind) to DNA and temporarily unwind the two spiral strands (double helix) of the DNA molecule. This unwinding is necessary for copying ( replicating ) DNA in preparation for cell division , and for repairing damaged DNA and any errors that are made when DNA is copied. In addition, after DNA is copied, ChlR1 plays a role in ensuring proper separation of each chromosome during cell division. By helping repair errors in DNA and ensuring proper DNA replication, the ChlR1 enzyme is involved in maintaining the stability of a cell's genetic information. DDX11 gene mutations severely reduce or completely eliminate ChlR1 enzyme activity. As a result, the enzyme cannot bind to DNA and cannot unwind the DNA strands to help with DNA replication and repair. A lack of functional ChlR1 impairs cell division and leads to an accumulation of DNA damage. This DNA damage can appear as breaks in the DNA, giving the condition its name. It is unclear how these problems in DNA maintenance lead to the specific abnormalities characteristic of Warsaw breakage syndrome. Learn more about the gene associated with Warsaw breakage syndrome DDX11 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition WABS Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Warsaw breakage syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Warsaw breakage syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM WARSAW BREAKAGE SYNDROME; WABS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Capo-Chichi JM, Bharti SK, Sommers JA, Yammine T, Chouery E, Patry L, Rouleau
GA, Samuels ME, Hamdan FF, Michaud JL, Brosh RM Jr, Megarbane A, Kibar Z.
Identification and biochemical characterization of a novel mutation in DDX11
causing Warsaw breakage syndrome. Hum Mutat. 2013 Jan;34(1):103-7. doi:
10.1002/humu.22226. Epub 2012 Oct 17. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central van der Lelij P, Chrzanowska KH, Godthelp BC, Rooimans MA, Oostra AB, Stumm M,
Zdzienicka MZ, Joenje H, de Winter JP. Warsaw breakage syndrome, a cohesinopathy
associated with mutations in the XPD helicase family member DDX11/ChlR1. Am J Hum
Genet. 2010 Feb 12;86(2):262-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.01.008. Epub 2010 Feb 4. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central van der Lelij P, Oostra AB, Rooimans MA, Joenje H, de Winter JP. Diagnostic
Overlap between Fanconi Anemia and the Cohesinopathies: Roberts Syndrome and
Warsaw Breakage Syndrome. Anemia. 2010;2010:565268. doi: 10.1155/2010/565268.
Epub 2010 Jul 18. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Wu Y, Sommers JA, Khan I, de Winter JP, Brosh RM Jr. Biochemical
characterization of Warsaw breakage syndrome helicase. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan
6;287(2):1007-21. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.276022. Epub 2011 Nov 18. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Growth Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Delayed growth Genetics Hearing loss - infants Intellectual disability Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2014