Chylomicron retention disease: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Chylomicron retention disease URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/chylomicron-retention-disease/ Chylomicron retention disease To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Chylomicron retention disease is an inherited disorder that impairs the normal absorption of fats, cholesterol, and certain vitamins from food. The features of chylomicron retention disease primarily affect the gastrointestinal system and nervous system. Chylomicron retention disease begins in infancy or early childhood. Affected children have slow growth and weight gain, frequent (chronic) diarrhea, and foul-smelling stools (steatorrhea). They also have reduced blood cholesterol levels (hypocholesterolemia). Some individuals with chylomicron retention disease develop an abnormal buildup of fats in the liver called hepatic stenosis and can have an enlarged liver . Other features of chylomicron retention disease develop later in childhood and often impair the function of the nervous system. Affected people may develop decreased reflexes (hyporeflexia) and a decreased ability to sense vibrations. Rarely, affected individuals have heart abnormalities or muscle wasting (amyotrophy). Frequency Chylomicron retention disease is a rare condition with approximately 50 cases described worldwide. Causes Mutations in a gene called SAR1B cause chylomicron retention disease. The SAR1B gene provides instructions for making a protein that is needed for the transport of molecules called chylomicrons. During digestion, chylomicrons are formed within cells called enterocytes that line the small intestine and absorb nutrients. Chylomicrons are needed to absorb fat-soluble vitamins and carry fats and cholesterol from the small intestine into the bloodstream . SAR1B gene mutations cause the retention of chylomicrons within enterocytes and prevent their release into the bloodstream. Impaired chylomicron transport causes severely decreased absorption (malabsorption) of dietary fats and fat-soluble vitamins, leading to nutritional and developmental problems in people with chylomicron retention disease. Affected individuals are unable to absorb sufficient fats, cholesterol, and vitamins that are necessary for normal growth and development. Learn more about the gene associated with Chylomicron retention disease SAR1B Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Anderson disease Anderson syndrome CMRD Hypobetalipoproteinemia with accumulation of apolipoprotein B-like protein in intestinal cells Lipid transport defect of intestine Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Chylomicron retention disease Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Chylomicron retention disease Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CHYLOMICRON RETENTION DISEASE; CMRD Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Burnett JR, Hooper AJ, Hegele RA. Chylomicron Retention Disease. 2022 Mar 24.
In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington,
Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK578949/ Citation on PubMed Charcosset M, Sassolas A, Peretti N, Roy CC, Deslandres C, Sinnett D, Levy E,
Lachaux A. Anderson or chylomicron retention disease: molecular impact of five
mutations in the SAR1B gene on the structure and the functionality of Sar1b
protein. Mol Genet Metab. 2008 Jan;93(1):74-84. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.08.120.
Epub 2007 Oct 22. Citation on PubMed Hesse D, Jaschke A, Chung B, Schurmann A. Trans-Golgi proteins participate in
the control of lipid droplet and chylomicron formation. Biosci Rep. 2013 Feb
22;33(1):1-9. doi: 10.1042/BSR20120082. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Levy E. Insights from human congenital disorders of intestinal lipid
metabolism. J Lipid Res. 2015 May;56(5):945-62. doi: 10.1194/jlr.R052415. Epub
2014 Nov 11. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Sane AT, Seidman E, Peretti N, Kleme ML, Delvin E, Deslandres C, Garofalo C,
Spahis S, Levy E. Understanding Chylomicron Retention Disease Through Sar1b
Gtpase Gene Disruption: Insight From Cell Culture. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol.
2017 Dec;37(12):2243-2251. doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.117.310121. Epub 2017 Oct 5. Citation on PubMed Silvain M, Bligny D, Aparicio T, Laforet P, Grodet A, Peretti N, Menard D,
Djouadi F, Jardel C, Begue JM, Walker F, Schmitz J, Lachaux A, Aggerbeck LP,
Samson-Bouma ME. Anderson's disease (chylomicron retention disease): a new
mutation in the SARA2 gene associated with muscular and cardiac abnormalities.
Clin Genet. 2008 Dec;74(6):546-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2008.01069.x. Epub
2008 Sep 11. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Malabsorption Syndromes Metabolic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Malabsorption Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2018