Renal tubular acidosis with deafness: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Renal tubular acidosis with deafness URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/renal-tubular-acidosis-with-deafness/ Renal tubular acidosis with deafness To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Renal tubular acidosis with deafness is a disorder characterized by kidney (renal) problems and hearing loss. The kidneys normally filter fluid and waste products from the body and remove them in urine; however, in people with this disorder, the kidneys do not remove enough acidic compounds from the body. Instead, the acids are absorbed back into the bloodstream, and the blood becomes too acidic. This chemical imbalance, called metabolic acidosis, can result in a range of signs and symptoms that vary in severity. Metabolic acidosis often causes nausea, vomiting, and dehydration; affected infants tend to have problems feeding and gaining weight (failure to thrive). Most children and adults with renal tubular acidosis with deafness have short stature, and many develop kidney stones . The metabolic acidosis that occurs in renal tubular acidosis with deafness may also lead to softening and weakening of the bones , called rickets in children and osteomalacia in adults. This bone disorder is characterized by bone pain, bowed legs, and difficulty walking. Rarely, people with renal tubular acidosis with deafness have episodes of hypokalemic paralysis, a condition that causes extreme muscle weakness associated with low levels of potassium in the blood (hypokalemia). In people with renal tubular acidosis with deafness, hearing loss caused by changes in the inner ear (sensorineural hearing loss) usually begins between childhood and young adulthood, and gradually gets worse. An inner ear abnormality affecting both ears occurs in most people with this disorder. This feature, which is called enlarged vestibular aqueduct, can be seen with medical imaging. The vestibular aqueduct is a bony canal that runs from the inner ear into the temporal bone of the skull and toward the brain. The relationship between enlarged vestibular aqueduct and hearing loss is unclear. In renal tubular acidosis with deafness, enlarged vestibular aqueduct typically occurs in individuals whose hearing loss begins in childhood. Frequency Renal tubular acidosis with deafness is a rare disorder; its prevalence is unknown. Causes Renal tubular acidosis with deafness is caused by mutations in the ATP6V1B1 or ATP6V0A4 gene. These genes provide instructions for making proteins that are parts (subunits) of a large protein complex known as vacuolar H + -ATPase (V-ATPase). V-ATPases are a group of similar complexes that act as pumps to move positively charged hydrogen atoms (protons) across membranes. Because acids are substances that can "donate" protons to other molecules, this movement of protons helps regulate the relative acidity (pH) of cells and their surrounding environment. Tight control of pH is necessary for most biological reactions to proceed properly. The V-ATPase that includes subunits produced from the ATP6V1B1 and ATP6V0A4 genes is found in the inner ear and in nephrons , which are the functional structures within the kidneys. Each nephron consists of two parts: a renal corpuscle (also known as a glomerulus) that filters the blood, and a renal tubule that reabsorbs substances that are needed and eliminates unneeded substances in urine. The V-ATPase is involved in regulating the amount of acid that is removed from the blood into the urine, and also in maintaining the proper pH of the fluid in the inner ear (endolymph). Mutations in the ATP6V1B1 or ATP6V0A4 gene impair the function of the V-ATPase complex and reduce the body's capability to control the pH of the blood and the fluid in the inner ear, resulting in the signs and symptoms of renal tubular acidosis with deafness. Learn more about the genes associated with Renal tubular acidosis with deafness ATP6V0A4 ATP6V1B1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition AR dRTA with deafness AR dRTA with hearing loss Autosomal recessive distal renal tubular acidosis with deafness Renal tubular acidosis type 1b Renal tubular acidosis with progressive nerve deafness Renal tubular acidosis, autosomal recessive, with progressive nerve deafness Renal tubular acidosis, distal, with progressive nerve deafness RTA with progressive nerve deafness Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Renal tubular acidosis with progressive nerve deafness Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Autosomal recessive distal renal tubular acidosis Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM RENAL TUBULAR ACIDOSIS, DISTAL, 2, WITH PROGRESSIVE SENSORINEURAL HEARING LOSS; DRTA2 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Alper SL. Familial renal tubular acidosis. J Nephrol. 2010 Nov-Dec;23 Suppl
16:S57-76. Citation on PubMed Andreucci E, Bianchi B, Carboni I, Lavoratti G, Mortilla M, Fonda C, Bigozzi
M, Genuardi M, Giglio S, Pela I. Inner ear abnormalities in four patients with
dRTA and SNHL: clinical and genetic heterogeneity. Pediatr Nephrol. 2009
Nov;24(11):2147-53. doi: 10.1007/s00467-009-1261-3. Epub 2009 Jul 29. Citation on PubMed Batlle D, Haque SK. Genetic causes and mechanisms of distal renal tubular
acidosis. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2012 Oct;27(10):3691-704. doi:
10.1093/ndt/gfs442. Citation on PubMed Gil H, Santos F, Garcia E, Alvarez MV, Ordonez FA, Malaga S, Coto E. Distal
RTA with nerve deafness: clinical spectrum and mutational analysis in five
children. Pediatr Nephrol. 2007 Jun;22(6):825-8. doi: 10.1007/s00467-006-0417-7.
Epub 2007 Jan 11. Citation on PubMed Li X, Chai Y, Tao Z, Li L, Huang Z, Li Y, Wu H, Yang T. Novel mutations in
ATP6V0A4 are associated with atypical progressive sensorineural hearing loss in a
Chinese patient with distal renal tubular acidosis. Int J Pediatr
Otorhinolaryngol. 2012 Jan;76(1):152-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2011.10.017. Epub
2011 Nov 16. Citation on PubMed Mohebbi N, Vargas-Poussou R, Hegemann SC, Schuknecht B, Kistler AD, Wuthrich
RP, Wagner CA. Homozygous and compound heterozygous mutations in the ATP6V1B1
gene in patients with renal tubular acidosis and sensorineural hearing loss. Clin
Genet. 2013 Mar;83(3):274-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2012.01891.x. Epub 2012 May
11. Citation on PubMed Nikali K, Vanegas JJ, Burley MW, Martinez J, Lopez LM, Bedoya G, Wrong OM,
Povey S, Unwin RJ, Ruiz-Linares A. Extensive founder effect for distal renal
tubular acidosis (dRTA) with sensorineural deafness in an isolated South American
population. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Oct 15;146A(20):2709-12. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.32495. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Sethi SK, Singh N, Gil H, Bagga A. Genetic studies in a family with distal
renal tubular acidosis and sensorineural deafness. Indian Pediatr. 2009
May;46(5):425-7. Citation on PubMed Stover EH, Borthwick KJ, Bavalia C, Eady N, Fritz DM, Rungroj N, Giersch AB,
Morton CC, Axon PR, Akil I, Al-Sabban EA, Baguley DM, Bianca S, Bakkaloglu A,
Bircan Z, Chauveau D, Clermont MJ, Guala A, Hulton SA, Kroes H, Li Volti G, Mir
S, Mocan H, Nayir A, Ozen S, Rodriguez Soriano J, Sanjad SA, Tasic V, Taylor CM,
Topaloglu R, Smith AN, Karet FE. Novel ATP6V1B1 and ATP6V0A4 mutations in
autosomal recessive distal renal tubular acidosis with new evidence for hearing
loss. J Med Genet. 2002 Nov;39(11):796-803. doi: 10.1136/jmg.39.11.796. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Vargas-Poussou R, Houillier P, Le Pottier N, Strompf L, Loirat C, Baudouin V,
Macher MA, Dechaux M, Ulinski T, Nobili F, Eckart P, Novo R, Cailliez M, Salomon
R, Nivet H, Cochat P, Tack I, Fargeot A, Bouissou F, Kesler GR, Lorotte S,
Godefroid N, Layet V, Morin G, Jeunemaitre X, Blanchard A. Genetic investigation
of autosomal recessive distal renal tubular acidosis: evidence for early
sensorineural hearing loss associated with mutations in the ATP6V0A4 gene. J Am
Soc Nephrol. 2006 May;17(5):1437-43. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2005121305. Epub 2006 Apr
12. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Hearing Disorders and Deafness Hearing Problems in Children Kidney Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Audiometry Distal renal tubular acidosis Genetics Hearing loss Kidney function tests Metabolic acidosis Sensorineural deafness Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 1, 2014