Mitochondrial membrane protein-associated neurodegeneration: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Mitochondrial membrane protein-associated neurodegeneration URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/mitochondrial-membrane-protein-associated-neurodegeneration/ Mitochondrial membrane protein-associated neurodegeneration To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Mitochondrial membrane protein-associated neurodegeneration (MPAN) is a disorder of the nervous system. The condition typically begins in childhood or early adulthood and worsens (progresses) over time. MPAN commonly begins with difficulty walking. As the condition progresses, affected individuals usually develop other movement problems, including muscle stiffness (spasticity) and involuntary muscle cramping (dystonia). Many people with MPAN have a pattern of movement abnormalities known as parkinsonism. These abnormalities include unusually slow movement (bradykinesia), muscle rigidity, involuntary trembling (tremors), and an inability to hold the body upright and balanced (postural instability). Other neurological problems that occur in individuals with MPAN include degeneration of the nerve cells that carry visual information from the eyes to the brain (optic atrophy), which can impair vision; problems with speech (dysarthria); difficulty swallowing (dysphagia); and, in later stages of the condition, an inability to control the bowels or the flow of urine (incontinence). Additionally, affected individuals may experience a loss of intellectual function (dementia) and psychiatric symptoms such as behavioral problems, mood swings, hyperactivity, and depression . MPAN is characterized by an abnormal buildup of iron in certain regions of the brain. Because of these deposits, MPAN is considered part of a group of conditions known as neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA). Frequency MPAN is a rare condition that is estimated to affect less than 1 in 1 million people. Causes Mutations in the C19orf12 gene cause MPAN. The protein produced from this gene is found in the membrane of cellular structures called mitochondria , which are the energy-producing centers of the cell. Although its function is unknown, researchers suggest that the C19orf12 protein plays a role in the maintenance of fat (lipid) molecules, a process known as lipid homeostasis. The gene mutations that cause this condition lead to an altered C19orf12 protein that likely has little or no function. It is unclear how these genetic changes lead to the neurological problems associated with MPAN. Researchers are working to determine whether there is a link between problems with lipid homeostasis and brain iron accumulation and how these abnormalities might contribute to the features of this disorder. Learn more about the gene associated with Mitochondrial membrane protein-associated neurodegeneration C19orf12 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Mitochondrial membrane protein-associated neurodegeneration due to C19orf12 mutation Mitochondrial protein-associated neurodegeneration MPAN NBIA4 Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation 4 Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation 4 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Mitochondrial membrane protein-associated neurodegeneration Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 4; NBIA4 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Dogu O, Krebs CE, Kaleagasi H, Demirtas Z, Oksuz N, Walker RH, Paisan-Ruiz C.
Rapid disease progression in adult-onset mitochondrial membrane
protein-associated neurodegeneration. Clin Genet. 2013 Oct;84(4):350-5. doi:
10.1111/cge.12079. Epub 2013 Jan 21. Citation on PubMed Gregory A, Klopstock T, Kmiec T, Hogarth P, Hayflick SJ. Mitochondrial
Membrane Protein-Associated Neurodegeneration. 2014 Feb 27 [updated 2021 Mar 4].
In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington,
Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK185329/ Citation on PubMed Hartig M, Prokisch H, Meitinger T, Klopstock T. Mitochondrial membrane
protein-associated neurodegeneration (MPAN). Int Rev Neurobiol. 2013;110:73-84.
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-410502-7.00004-1. Citation on PubMed Hartig MB, Iuso A, Haack T, Kmiec T, Jurkiewicz E, Heim K, Roeber S, Tarabin
V, Dusi S, Krajewska-Walasek M, Jozwiak S, Hempel M, Winkelmann J, Elstner M,
Oexle K, Klopstock T, Mueller-Felber W, Gasser T, Trenkwalder C, Tiranti V,
Kretzschmar H, Schmitz G, Strom TM, Meitinger T, Prokisch H. Absence of an orphan
mitochondrial protein, c19orf12, causes a distinct clinical subtype of
neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Oct
7;89(4):543-50. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.09.007. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Hogarth P, Gregory A, Kruer MC, Sanford L, Wagoner W, Natowicz MR, Egel RT,
Subramony SH, Goldman JG, Berry-Kravis E, Foulds NC, Hammans SR, Desguerre I,
Rodriguez D, Wilson C, Diedrich A, Green S, Tran H, Reese L, Woltjer RL, Hayflick
SJ. New NBIA subtype: genetic, clinical, pathologic, and radiographic features of
MPAN. Neurology. 2013 Jan 15;80(3):268-75. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31827e07be.
Epub 2012 Dec 26. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Schulte EC, Claussen MC, Jochim A, Haack T, Hartig M, Hempel M, Prokisch H,
Haun-Junger U, Winkelmann J, Hemmer B, Forschler A, Ilg R. Mitochondrial membrane
protein associated neurodegenration: a novel variant of neurodegeneration with
brain iron accumulation. Mov Disord. 2013 Feb;28(2):224-7. doi:
10.1002/mds.25256. Epub 2012 Nov 19. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Degenerative Nerve Diseases Genetic Disorders Mitochondrial Diseases Movement Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Dementia Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated January 1, 2017