Primary hyperoxaluria: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Primary hyperoxaluria URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/primary-hyperoxaluria/ Primary hyperoxaluria To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Primary hyperoxaluria is a rare condition characterized by recurrent kidney and bladder stones. The condition often results in end stage renal disease (ESRD), which is a life-threatening condition that prevents the kidneys from filtering fluids and waste products from the body effectively. Primary hyperoxaluria results from the overproduction of a substance called oxalate. Oxalate is filtered through the kidneys and excreted as a waste product in urine, leading to abnormally high levels of this substance in urine (hyperoxaluria). During its excretion, oxalate can combine with calcium to form calcium oxalate, a hard compound that is the main component of kidney and bladder stones. Deposits of calcium oxalate can damage the kidneys and other organs and lead to blood in the urine (hematuria), urinary tract infections, kidney damage, ESRD, and injury to other organs. Over time, kidney function decreases such that the kidneys can no longer excrete as much oxalate as they receive. As a result oxalate levels in the blood rise, and the substance gets deposited in tissues throughout the body (systemic oxalosis), particularly in bones and the walls of blood vessels. Oxalosis in bones can cause fractures. There are three types of primary hyperoxaluria that differ in their severity and genetic cause. In primary hyperoxaluria type 1, kidney stones typically begin to appear anytime from childhood to early adulthood, and ESRD can develop at any age. Primary hyperoxaluria type 2 is similar to type 1, but ESRD develops later in life. In primary hyperoxaluria type 3, affected individuals often develop kidney stones in early childhood, but few cases of this type have been described so additional signs and symptoms of this type are unclear. Frequency Primary hyperoxaluria is estimated to affect 1 in 58,000 individuals worldwide. Type 1 is the most common form, accounting for approximately 80 percent of cases. Types 2 and 3 each account for about 10 percent of cases. Causes Mutations in the AGXT , GRHPR , and HOGA1 genes cause primary hyperoxaluria types 1, 2, and 3, respectively. These genes provide instructions for making enzymes that are involved in the breakdown and processing of protein building blocks ( amino acids ) and other compounds. The enzyme produced from the HOGA1 gene is involved in the breakdown of an amino acid, which results in the formation of a compound called glyoxylate. This compound is further broken down by the enzymes produced from the AGXT and GRHPR genes. Mutations in the AGXT , GRHPR , or HOGA1 gene lead to a decrease in production or activity of the respective proteins, which prevents the normal breakdown of glyoxylate. AGXT and GRHPR gene mutations result in an accumulation of glyoxylate, which is then converted to oxalate for removal from the body as a waste product. HOGA1 gene mutations also result in excess oxalate, although researchers are unsure as to how this occurs. Oxalate that is not excreted from the body combines with calcium to form calcium oxalate deposits, which can damage the kidneys and other organs. Learn more about the genes associated with Primary hyperoxaluria AGXT GRHPR HOGA1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Congenital oxaluria D-glycerate dehydrogenase deficiency Glyceric aciduria Glycolic aciduria Hepatic AGT deficiency Hyperoxaluria, primary Oxalosis Oxaluria, primary Peroxisomal alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase deficiency Primary oxalosis Primary oxaluria Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Primary hyperoxaluria type 3 Genetic Testing Registry: Hyperoxaluria Genetic Testing Registry: Primary hyperoxaluria Genetic Testing Registry: Primary hyperoxaluria, type I Genetic Testing Registry: Primary hyperoxaluria, type II Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Primary hyperoxaluria type 1 Primary hyperoxaluria type 2 Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM HYPEROXALURIA, PRIMARY, TYPE I; HP1 HYPEROXALURIA, PRIMARY, TYPE II; HP2 HYPEROXALURIA, PRIMARY, TYPE III; HP3 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Allard L, Cochat P, Leclerc AL, Cachat F, Fichtner C, De Souza VC, Garcia CD,
Camoin-Schweitzer MC, Macher MA, Acquaviva-Bourdain C, Bacchetta J. Renal
function can be impaired in children with primary hyperoxaluria type 3. Pediatr
Nephrol. 2015 Oct;30(10):1807-13. doi: 10.1007/s00467-015-3090-x. Epub 2015 May
14. Citation on PubMed Cochat P, Rumsby G. Primary hyperoxaluria. N Engl J Med. 2013 Aug
15;369(7):649-58. doi: 10.1056/NEJMra1301564. No abstract available. Erratum In:
N Engl J Med. 2013 Nov 28;369(22):2168. Citation on PubMed Hopp K, Cogal AG, Bergstralh EJ, Seide BM, Olson JB, Meek AM, Lieske JC,
Milliner DS, Harris PC; Rare Kidney Stone Consortium. Phenotype-Genotype
Correlations and Estimated Carrier Frequencies of Primary Hyperoxaluria. J Am Soc
Nephrol. 2015 Oct;26(10):2559-70. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2014070698. Epub 2015 Feb 2. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Hoppe B. An update on primary hyperoxaluria. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2012 Jun
12;8(8):467-75. doi: 10.1038/nrneph.2012.113. Citation on PubMed Milliner DS, Harris PC, Sas DJ, Cogal AG, Lieske JC. Primary Hyperoxaluria
Type 1. 2002 Jun 19 [updated 2024 Aug 15]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM,
Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1283/ Citation on PubMed Milliner DS, Harris PC, Sas DJ, Lieske JC. Primary Hyperoxaluria Type 3. 2015
Sep 24 [updated 2023 Feb 9]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace
SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA):
University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK316514/ Citation on PubMed Rumsby G, Hulton SA. Primary Hyperoxaluria Type 2. 2008 Dec 2 [updated 2017
Dec 21]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A,
editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of
Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK2692/ Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Amino Acid Metabolism Disorders Genetic Disorders Kidney Stones MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Related Medical Tests Crystals in Urine Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 1, 2015