Capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/capillary-malformation-arteriovenous-malformation-syndrome/ Capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation syndrome (CM-AVM) is a disorder of the vascular system, which is the body's complex network of blood vessels. The vascular system consists of arteries, which carry oxygen-rich blood from the heart to the body's various organs and tissues; veins, which carry blood back to the heart; and capillaries, which are tiny blood vessels that connect arteries and veins. CM-AVM is characterized by capillary malformations (CMs), which are composed of enlarged capillaries that increase blood flow near the surface of the skin. These malformations look like multiple small, round, pink or red spots on the skin. In most affected individuals, capillary malformations occur on the face, arms, and legs. These spots may be visible from birth or may develop during childhood. By themselves, capillary malformations usually do not cause any health problems. In some people with CM-AVM, capillary malformations are the only sign of the disorder. However, other affected individuals also have more serious vascular abnormalities known as arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) and arteriovenous fistulas (AVFs). AVMs and AVFs are abnormal connections between arteries, veins, and capillaries that affect blood circulation. Depending on where they occur in the body, these abnormalities can be associated with complications including abnormal bleeding, migraine headaches, seizures, and heart failure. In some cases the complications can be life-threatening. In people with CM-AVM, complications of AVMs and AVFs tend to appear in infancy or early childhood; however, some of these vascular abnormalities never cause any symptoms. Some vascular abnormalities seen in CM-AVM are similar to those that occur in a condition called Parkes Weber syndrome . In addition to vascular abnormalities, Parkes Weber syndrome usually involves overgrowth of one limb. CM-AVM and some cases of Parkes Weber syndrome have the same genetic cause. Frequency CM-AVM is thought to occur in at least 1 in 100,000 people of northern European origin. The prevalence of the condition in other populations is unknown. Causes CM-AVM is caused by mutations in the RASA1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein known as p120-RasGAP, which is involved in transmitting chemical signals from outside the cell to the nucleus. These signals help control several important cell functions, including cell growth and division (proliferation), the process by which cells mature to carry out specific functions (differentiation), and cell movement. The role of the p120-RasGAP protein is not fully understood, although it appears to be essential for the normal development of the vascular system. Mutations in the RASA1 gene lead to the production of a nonfunctional version of the p120-RasGAP protein. A loss of this protein's activity disrupts tightly regulated chemical signaling during development. However, it is unclear how these changes lead to the specific vascular abnormalities seen in people with CM-AVM. Learn more about the gene associated with Capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation syndrome RASA1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent . Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Other Names for This Condition Capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation CM-AVM Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation 1 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CAPILLARY MALFORMATION-ARTERIOVENOUS MALFORMATION 1; CMAVM1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bayrak-Toydemir P, Stevenson DA. Capillary Malformation-Arteriovenous
Malformation Syndrome. 2011 Feb 22 [updated 2019 Sep 12]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J,
Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R)
[Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available
from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK52764/ Citation on PubMed Boon LM, Mulliken JB, Vikkula M. RASA1: variable phenotype with capillary and
arteriovenous malformations. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2005 Jun;15(3):265-9. doi:
10.1016/j.gde.2005.03.004. Citation on PubMed Eerola I, Boon LM, Mulliken JB, Burrows PE, Dompmartin A, Watanabe S, Vanwijck
R, Vikkula M. Capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation, a new clinical
and genetic disorder caused by RASA1 mutations. Am J Hum Genet. 2003
Dec;73(6):1240-9. doi: 10.1086/379793. Epub 2003 Nov 24. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Hershkovitz D, Bercovich D, Sprecher E, Lapidot M. RASA1 mutations may cause
hereditary capillary malformations without arteriovenous malformations. Br J
Dermatol. 2008 May;158(5):1035-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2008.08493.x. Epub
2008 Mar 20. Citation on PubMed Revencu N, Boon LM, Mulliken JB, Enjolras O, Cordisco MR, Burrows PE, Clapuyt
P, Hammer F, Dubois J, Baselga E, Brancati F, Carder R, Quintal JM, Dallapiccola
B, Fischer G, Frieden IJ, Garzon M, Harper J, Johnson-Patel J, Labreze C,
Martorell L, Paltiel HJ, Pohl A, Prendiville J, Quere I, Siegel DH, Valente EM,
Van Hagen A, Van Hest L, Vaux KK, Vicente A, Weibel L, Chitayat D, Vikkula M.
Parkes Weber syndrome, vein of Galen aneurysmal malformation, and other fast-flow
vascular anomalies are caused by RASA1 mutations. Hum Mutat. 2008
Jul;29(7):959-65. doi: 10.1002/humu.20746. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Arteriovenous Malformations Genetic Disorders Vascular Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Cerebral arteriovenous malformation Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2011