Hypomyelination and congenital cataract: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Hypomyelination and congenital cataract URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/hypomyelination-and-congenital-cataract/ Hypomyelination and congenital cataract To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Hypomyelination and congenital cataract is an inherited condition that affects the nervous system and the eyes. This disease is one of a group of genetic disorders called leukoencephalopathies.  Leukoencephalopathies involve abnormalities of the brain's white matter. White matter consists of nerve fibers covered by a fatty substance called myelin. Myelin insulates nerve fibers and promotes the rapid transmission of nerve impulses.  Hypomyelination and congenital cataract is caused by a reduced ability to form myelin (hypomyelination). Additionally, people with this disorder are typically born with a clouding of the lens ( cataract ) in both eyes. People with this condition usually have normal development throughout the first year of life.  Development slows around the age of 1.  Most affected children learn to walk between the ages of 1 and 2, although they usually need some type of support.  Over time they experience muscle weakness and wasting (atrophy) in their legs, and many affected people eventually require wheelchair assistance.  Weakness in the muscles of the trunk and a progressive abnormal curvature of the spine ( scoliosis ) further impair walking in some individuals.  Most people with hypomyelination and congenital cataract have reduced sensation in their arms and legs (peripheral neuropathy).  In addition, affected individuals typically have speech difficulties (dysarthria) and mild to moderate intellectual disability. Frequency The prevalence of hypomyelination and congenital cataract is unknown. Causes Variants (also called mutations) in the HYCC1 gene cause hypomyelination and congenital cataract. The HYCC1 gene provides instructions for making a protein called hyccin, the function of which is not completely understood. Based on the features of hypomyelination and congenital cataract, researchers presume that hyccin is involved in the formation of myelin throughout the nervous system. Hyccin is also active in the lens of the eye, the heart, and the kidneys.  It is unclear how variants in the HYCC1 gene cause cataracts. Most HYCC1 gene variants that cause hypomyelination and congenital cataract prevent the production of hyccin. People who cannot produce any hyccin have problems forming myelin, leading to the signs and symptoms of this condition. People who have variants that allow some protein production tend to have milder symptoms than those who produce no protein. These individuals typically retain the ability to walk longer, although they still need support, and they usually do not have peripheral neuropathy. Learn more about the gene associated with Hypomyelination and congenital cataract HYCC1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell must have a variant to cause the disorder. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition HCC Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Hypomyelination and Congenital Cataract Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Hypomyelination-congenital cataract syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM LEUKODYSTROPHY, HYPOMYELINATING, 5; HLD5 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Biancheri R, Zara F, Bruno C, Rossi A, Bordo L, Gazzerro E, Sotgia F,
Pedemonte M, Scapolan S, Bado M, Uziel G, Bugiani M, Lamba LD, Costa V, Schenone
A, Rozemuller AJ, Tortori-Donati P, Lisanti MP, van der Knaap MS, Minetti C.
Phenotypic characterization of hypomyelination and congenital cataract. Ann
Neurol. 2007 Aug;62(2):121-7. doi: 10.1002/ana.21175. Citation on PubMed Rossi A, Biancheri R, Zara F, Bruno C, Uziel G, van der Knaap MS, Minetti C,
Tortori-Donati P. Hypomyelination and congenital cataract: neuroimaging features
of a novel inherited white matter disorder. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2008
Feb;29(2):301-5. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A0792. Epub 2007 Nov 1. Citation on PubMed Ugur SA, Tolun A. A deletion in DRCTNNB1A associated with hypomyelination and
juvenile onset cataract. Eur J Hum Genet. 2008 Feb;16(2):261-4. doi:
10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201935. Epub 2007 Oct 10. Citation on PubMed Zara F, Biancheri R, Bruno C, Bordo L, Assereto S, Gazzerro E, Sotgia F, Wang
XB, Gianotti S, Stringara S, Pedemonte M, Uziel G, Rossi A, Schenone A,
Tortori-Donati P, van der Knaap MS, Lisanti MP, Minetti C. Deficiency of hyccin,
a newly identified membrane protein, causes hypomyelination and congenital
cataract. Nat Genet. 2006 Oct;38(10):1111-3. doi: 10.1038/ng1870. Epub 2006 Sep
3. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Leukodystrophies Peripheral Nerve Disorders Scoliosis MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Congenital cataract Genetics Muscle atrophy Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated July 1, 2009