Argininosuccinic aciduria: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Argininosuccinic aciduria URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/argininosuccinic-aciduria/ Argininosuccinic aciduria To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Argininosuccinic aciduria is an inherited disorder that causes ammonia to accumulate in the blood. Ammonia, which is formed when proteins are broken down in the body, is toxic if the levels become too high. The nervous system is especially sensitive to the effects of excess ammonia. Argininosuccinic aciduria usually becomes evident in the first few days of life. An infant with argininosuccinic aciduria may be lacking in energy (lethargic) or unwilling to eat, and have a poorly controlled breathing rate or body temperature. Some babies with this disorder experience seizures or unusual body movements, or go into a coma. Complications from argininosuccinic aciduria may include developmental delay and intellectual disability. Progressive liver damage, high blood pressure ( hypertension ), skin lesions, and brittle hair may also be seen. Occasionally, individuals may inherit a mild form of the disorder. These individuals can have an accumulation of ammonia in the bloodstream only during periods of illness or other stress, or mild intellectual disability or learning disabilities with no evidence of elevated ammonia levels. Frequency Argininosuccinic aciduria occurs in approximately 1 in 70,000 to 218,000 newborns. Most cases of this condition are detected shortly after birth by newborn screening. Causes Mutations in the ASL gene cause argininosuccinic aciduria. This condition belongs to a class of genetic diseases called urea cycle disorders because they are caused by problems with a process in the body called the urea cycle. The urea cycle is a sequence of reactions that occurs in liver cells. This cycle breaks down excess nitrogen, which is made when protein is used by the body, to make a compound called urea. Urea is removed from the body in urine. Breaking down excess nitrogen and excreting it as urea prevents it from accumulating in the body as ammonia. The ASL gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called argininosuccinate lyase, which is needed for the fourth step of the urea cycle. The specific role of the argininosuccinate lyase enzyme is to start the reaction in which the amino acid arginine, a building block of proteins, is produced from argininosuccinate, the molecule that carries the waste nitrogen collected earlier in the urea cycle. The arginine is later broken down into urea, which is excreted, and ornithine, which restarts the urea cycle. In people with argininosuccinic aciduria, argininosuccinate lyase is dysfunctional or missing. As a result, the urea cycle cannot proceed normally, arginine is not produced, and nitrogen is not broken down efficiently. The excess nitrogen accumulates in the blood in the form of ammonia. This buildup of ammonia damages the brain and other tissues and causes neurological problems and other signs and symptoms of argininosuccinic aciduria. It is unclear how a lack of arginine contributes to the features of this condition. Learn more about the gene associated with Argininosuccinic aciduria ASL Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Argininosuccinate lyase deficiency Argininosuccinic acidemia Argininosuccinicaciduria Argininosuccinyl-CoA lyase deficiency Arginosuccinase deficiency ASA ASAuria ASL deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Argininosuccinate lyase deficiency Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Argininosuccinic aciduria Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM ARGININOSUCCINIC ACIDURIA Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Ah Mew N, Simpson KL, Gropman AL, Lanpher BC, Chapman KA, Summar ML. Urea
Cycle Disorders Overview. 2003 Apr 29 [updated 2017 Jun 22]. In: Adam MP, Feldman
J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R)
[Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available
from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1217/ Citation on PubMed Kleijer WJ, Garritsen VH, Linnebank M, Mooyer P, Huijmans JG, Mustonen A,
Simola KO, Arslan-Kirchner M, Battini R, Briones P, Cardo E, Mandel H, Tschiedel
E, Wanders RJ, Koch HG. Clinical, enzymatic, and molecular genetic
characterization of a biochemical variant type of argininosuccinic aciduria:
prenatal and postnatal diagnosis in five unrelated families. J Inherit Metab Dis.
2002 Sep;25(5):399-410. doi: 10.1023/a:1020108002877. Citation on PubMed Lee B, Goss J. Long-term correction of urea cycle disorders. J Pediatr. 2001
Jan;138(1 Suppl):S62-71. doi: 10.1067/mpd.2001.111838. Citation on PubMed Nagamani SCS, Erez A, Lee B. Argininosuccinate Lyase Deficiency. 2011 Feb 3
[updated 2019 Mar 28]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE,
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University
of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK51784/ Citation on PubMed National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) National Urea Cycle Disorders Foundation Reid Sutton V, Pan Y, Davis EC, Craigen WJ. A mouse model of argininosuccinic
aciduria: biochemical characterization. Mol Genet Metab. 2003 Jan;78(1):11-6.
doi: 10.1016/s1096-7192(02)00206-8. Citation on PubMed Scaglia F, Brunetti-Pierri N, Kleppe S, Marini J, Carter S, Garlick P, Jahoor
F, O'Brien W, Lee B. Clinical consequences of urea cycle enzyme deficiencies and
potential links to arginine and nitric oxide metabolism. J Nutr. 2004 Oct;134(10
Suppl):2775S-2782S; discussion 2796S-2797S. doi: 10.1093/jn/134.10.2775S. Citation on PubMed Stadler S, Gempel K, Bieger I, Pontz BF, Gerbitz KD, Bauer MF, Hofmann S.
Detection of neonatal argininosuccinate lyase deficiency by serum tandem mass
spectrometry. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2001 Jun;24(3):370-8. doi:
10.1023/a:1010560704092. Citation on PubMed Wilcken B, Smith A, Brown DA. Urine screening for aminoacidopathies: is it
beneficial? Results of a long-term follow-up of cases detected bny screening one
millon babies. J Pediatr. 1980 Sep;97(3):492-7. doi:
10.1016/s0022-3476(80)80216-2. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Amino Acid Metabolism Disorders Genetic Brain Disorders Genetic Disorders Newborn Screening MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Hereditary urea cycle abnormality Related Medical Tests Ammonia Levels Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 1, 2020