Atelosteogenesis type 2: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Atelosteogenesis type 2 URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/atelosteogenesis-type-2/ Atelosteogenesis type 2 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Atelosteogenesis type 2 is a severe disorder of cartilage and bone development.  Infants born with this condition have very short arms and legs, a narrow chest, and a prominent, rounded abdomen.  This disorder is also characterized by an opening in the roof of the mouth (a cleft palate ), distinctive facial features, an inward- and upward-turning foot ( clubfoot ), and unusually positioned thumbs ( hitchhiker thumbs ). The signs and symptoms of atelosteogenesis type 2 are similar to those of another skeletal disorder called diastrophic dysplasia ; however, atelosteogenesis type 2 is typically more severe.  As a result of serious health problems, infants with this disorder are usually stillborn or die soon after birth from respiratory failure. Some infants, however, have lived for a short time with intensive medical support. Frequency Atelosteogenesis type 2 is an extremely rare genetic disorder; its incidence is unknown. Causes Atelosteogenesis type 2 is one of several skeletal disorders caused by mutations in the SLC26A2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is essential for the normal development of cartilage and for its conversion to bone. Cartilage is a tough, flexible tissue that makes up much of the skeleton during early development. Most cartilage is later converted to bone, except for the cartilage that continues to cover and protect the ends of bones and is present in the nose and external ears.  Mutations in the SLC26A2 gene disrupt the structure of developing cartilage, preventing bones from forming properly and resulting in the skeletal problems characteristic of atelosteogenesis type 2. Learn more about the gene associated with Atelosteogenesis type 2 SLC26A2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition AO2 Atelosteogenesis de la Chapelle type Atelosteogenesis, type 2 De la Chapelle dysplasia McAlister dysplasia Neonatal osseous dysplasia 1 Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Atelosteogenesis type II Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Atelosteogenesis type II Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM ATELOSTEOGENESIS, TYPE II; AO2 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Hastbacka J, Superti-Furga A, Wilcox WR, Rimoin DL, Cohn DH, Lander ES.
Atelosteogenesis type II is caused by mutations in the diastrophic dysplasia
sulfate-transporter gene (DTDST): evidence for a phenotypic series involving
three chondrodysplasias. Am J Hum Genet. 1996 Feb;58(2):255-62. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Newbury-Ecob R. Atelosteogenesis type 2. J Med Genet. 1998 Jan;35(1):49-53.
doi: 10.1136/jmg.35.1.49. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Rossi A, Superti-Furga A. Mutations in the diastrophic dysplasia sulfate
transporter (DTDST) gene (SLC26A2): 22 novel mutations, mutation review,
associated skeletal phenotypes, and diagnostic relevance. Hum Mutat. 2001
Mar;17(3):159-71. doi: 10.1002/humu.1. Erratum In: Hum Mutat 2001;18(1):82. Citation on PubMed Superti-Furga A, Unger S. SLC26A2-Related Atelosteogenesis. 2002 Aug
30 [updated 2023 Mar 16]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace
SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA):
University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1317/ Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Bone Diseases Dwarfism Genetic Disorders Respiratory Failure MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 1, 2020