X-linked thrombocytopenia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → X-linked thrombocytopenia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/x-linked-thrombocytopenia/ X-linked thrombocytopenia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description X-linked thrombocytopenia is a bleeding disorder that primarily affects males. This condition is characterized by a blood cell abnormality called thrombocytopenia, which is a shortage in the number of blood cells involved in clotting (platelets). Affected individuals often have abnormally small platelets as well, a condition called microthrombocytopenia. X-linked thrombocytopenia can cause individuals to bruise easily or have episodes of prolonged bleeding following minor trauma or even in the absence of injury (spontaneous bleeding). Some people with this condition experience spontaneous bleeding in the brain (cerebral hemorrhage), which can cause brain damage that can be life-threatening. Some people with X-linked thrombocytopenia also have patches of red, irritated skin (eczema) or an increased susceptibility to infections. In severe cases, additional features can develop, such as cancer or autoimmune disorders, which occur when the immune system malfunctions and attacks the body's own tissues and organs. It is unclear, however, if people with these features have X-linked thrombocytopenia or a more severe disorder with similar signs and symptoms called Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome . Some people have a mild form of the disorder called intermittent thrombocytopenia. These individuals have normal platelet production at times with episodes of thrombocytopenia. Frequency The estimated incidence of X-linked thrombocytopenia is between 1 and 10 per million males worldwide; this condition is rarer among females. Causes Mutations in the WAS gene cause X-linked thrombocytopenia. The WAS gene provides instructions for making a protein called WASP. This protein is found in all blood cells. WASP is involved in relaying signals from the surface of blood cells to the actin cytoskeleton , which is a network of fibers that make up the cell's structural framework. WASP signaling activates the cell when it is needed and triggers its movement and attachment to other cells and tissues (adhesion). In white blood cells , which protect the body from infection, this signaling allows the actin cytoskeleton to establish the interaction between cells and the foreign invaders that they target (immune synapse). WAS gene mutations that cause X-linked thrombocytopenia typically lead to the production of an altered protein. The altered WASP has reduced function and cannot efficiently relay signals from the cell membrane to the actin cytoskeleton. In people with X-linked thrombocytopenia, these signaling problems primarily affect platelets, impairing their development. In some cases, white blood cells are affected. When WASP function is impaired in white blood cells, they are less able to respond to foreign invaders and immune problems such as infections, eczema, and autoimmune disorders can occur. Learn more about the gene associated with X-linked thrombocytopenia WAS Inheritance This condition is inherited in an X-linked pattern. The gene associated with this condition is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation in one of the two copies of the gene in each cell may or may not cause the disorder. In males (who have only one X chromosome), a mutation in the only copy of the gene in each cell causes the disorder. In most cases of X-linked inheritance, males experience more severe symptoms of the disorder than females.  A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons. Other Names for This Condition Thrombocytopenia 1 XLT Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Thrombocytopenia 1 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center X-linked thrombocytopenia with normal platelets Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM THROMBOCYTOPENIA 1; THC1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Albert MH, Bittner TC, Nonoyama S, Notarangelo LD, Burns S, Imai K, Espanol T,
Fasth A, Pellier I, Strauss G, Morio T, Gathmann B, Noordzij JG, Fillat C, Hoenig
M, Nathrath M, Meindl A, Pagel P, Wintergerst U, Fischer A, Thrasher AJ,
Belohradsky BH, Ochs HD. X-linked thrombocytopenia (XLT) due to WAS mutations:
clinical characteristics, long-term outcome, and treatment options. Blood. 2010
Apr 22;115(16):3231-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-09-239087. Epub 2010 Feb 19. Citation on PubMed Andreu N, Matamoros N, Escudero A, Fillat C. Two novel mutations identified in
the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein gene cause Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and
thrombocytopenia. Int J Mol Med. 2007 May;19(5):777-82. Citation on PubMed Bourne HC, Weston S, Prasad M, Edkins E, Benson EM. Identification of WASP
mutations in 10 Australian families with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and X-linked
thrombocytopenia. Pathology. 2004 Jun;36(3):262-4. doi:
10.1080/00313020410001692521. Citation on PubMed Imai K, Morio T, Zhu Y, Jin Y, Itoh S, Kajiwara M, Yata J, Mizutani S, Ochs
HD, Nonoyama S. Clinical course of patients with WASP gene mutations. Blood. 2004
Jan 15;103(2):456-64. doi: 10.1182/blood-2003-05-1480. Epub 2003 Sep 11. Citation on PubMed Jin Y, Mazza C, Christie JR, Giliani S, Fiorini M, Mella P, Gandellini F,
Stewart DM, Zhu Q, Nelson DL, Notarangelo LD, Ochs HD. Mutations of the
Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome Protein (WASP): hotspots, effect on transcription, and
translation and phenotype/genotype correlation. Blood. 2004 Dec
15;104(13):4010-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2003-05-1592. Epub 2004 Jul 29. Citation on PubMed Lee WI, Huang JL, Jaing TH, Wu KH, Chien YH, Chang KW. Clinical aspects and
genetic analysis of taiwanese patients with wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein
mutation: the first identification of x-linked thrombocytopenia in the chinese
with novel mutations. J Clin Immunol. 2010 Jul;30(4):593-601. doi:
10.1007/s10875-010-9381-x. Epub 2010 Mar 16. Citation on PubMed Notarangelo LD, Notarangelo LD, Ochs HD. WASP and the phenotypic range
associated with deficiency. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2005 Dec;5(6):485-90.
doi: 10.1097/01.all.0000191243.25757.ce. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Platelet Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Thrombocytopenia Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2018