Autosomal dominant congenital stationary night blindness: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Autosomal dominant congenital stationary night blindness URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/autosomal-dominant-congenital-stationary-night-blindness/ Autosomal dominant congenital stationary night blindness To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Autosomal dominant congenital stationary night blindness is a disorder of the retina, which is the specialized tissue at the back of the eye that detects light and color. People with this condition typically have difficulty seeing and distinguishing objects in low light (night blindness). For example, they are not able to identify road signs at night and some people cannot see stars in the night sky. Affected individuals have normal daytime vision and typically do not have other vision problems related to this disorder. The night blindness associated with this condition is congenital, which means it is present from birth. This vision impairment tends to remain stable (stationary); it does not worsen over time. Frequency Autosomal dominant congenital stationary night blindness is likely a rare disease; however, its prevalence is unknown. Causes Mutations in the RHO , GNAT1 , or PDE6B gene cause autosomal dominant congenital stationary night blindness. The proteins produced from these genes are necessary for normal vision, particularly in low-light conditions. These proteins are found in specialized light receptor cells in the retina called rods. Rods transmit visual signals from the eye to the brain when light is dim. The RHO gene provides instructions for making a protein called rhodopsin, which is turned on (activated) by light entering the eye. Rhodopsin then attaches (binds) to and activates the protein produced from the GNAT1 gene, alpha (α)-transducin. The α-transducin protein then triggers the activation of a protein called cGMP-PDE, which is made up of multiple parts (subunits) including a subunit produced from the PDE6B gene. Activated cGMP-PDE triggers a series of chemical reactions that create electrical signals. These signals are transmitted from rod cells to the brain, where they are interpreted as vision. Mutations in the RHO , GNAT1 , or PDE6B gene disrupt the normal signaling that occurs within rod cells. As a result, the rods cannot effectively transmit signals to the brain, leading to a lack of visual perception in low light. Learn more about the genes associated with Autosomal dominant congenital stationary night blindness GNAT1 PDE6B RHO Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition AdCSNB CSNBAD Night blindness, congenital stationary, autosomal dominant Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital stationary night blindness Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM NIGHT BLINDNESS, CONGENITAL STATIONARY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 2; CSNBAD2 NIGHT BLINDNESS, CONGENITAL STATIONARY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 3; CSNBAD3 NIGHT BLINDNESS, CONGENITAL STATIONARY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1; CSNBAD1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Gal A, Orth U, Baehr W, Schwinger E, Rosenberg T. Heterozygous missense
mutation in the rod cGMP phosphodiesterase beta-subunit gene in autosomal
dominant stationary night blindness. Nat Genet. 1994 May;7(1):64-8. doi:
10.1038/ng0594-64. Erratum In: Nat Genet. 1994 Aug;7(4):551. doi:
10.1038/ng0894-551a. Citation on PubMed McAlear SD, Kraft TW, Gross AK. 1 rhodopsin mutations in congenital night
blindness. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2010;664:263-72. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-1399-9_30. Citation on PubMed Szabo V, Kreienkamp HJ, Rosenberg T, Gal A. p.Gln200Glu, a putative
constitutively active mutant of rod alpha-transducin (GNAT1) in autosomal
dominant congenital stationary night blindness. Hum Mutat. 2007 Jul;28(7):741-2.
doi: 10.1002/humu.9499. Citation on PubMed Tsang SH, Woodruff ML, Jun L, Mahajan V, Yamashita CK, Pedersen R, Lin CS,
Goff SP, Rosenberg T, Larsen M, Farber DB, Nusinowitz S. Transgenic mice carrying
the H258N mutation in the gene encoding the beta-subunit of phosphodiesterase-6
(PDE6B) provide a model for human congenital stationary night blindness. Hum
Mutat. 2007 Mar;28(3):243-54. doi: 10.1002/humu.20425. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Zeitz C, Gross AK, Leifert D, Kloeckener-Gruissem B, McAlear SD, Lemke J,
Neidhardt J, Berger W. Identification and functional characterization of a novel
rhodopsin mutation associated with autosomal dominant CSNB. Invest Ophthalmol Vis
Sci. 2008 Sep;49(9):4105-14. doi: 10.1167/iovs.08-1717. Epub 2008 May 16. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Vision Impairment and Blindness MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Vision - night blindness Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated November 1, 2013