Cockayne syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Cockayne syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/cockayne-syndrome/ Cockayne syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Cockayne syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by an abnormally small head size (microcephaly), a failure to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive) leading to very short stature, and delayed development. The signs and symptoms of this condition are usually apparent from infancy, and they worsen over time. Most affected individuals have an increased sensitivity to sunlight (photosensitivity), and in some cases even a small amount of sun exposure can cause a sunburn or blistering of the skin. Other signs and symptoms often include hearing loss, vision loss, severe tooth decay, bone abnormalities, hands and feet that are cold all the time, and changes in the brain that can be seen on brain scans. People with Cockayne syndrome have a serious reaction to an antibiotic medication called metronidazole. If affected individuals take this medication, it can cause life-threatening liver failure. Cockayne syndrome is sometimes divided into types I, II, and III based on the severity and age of onset of symptoms. However, the differences between the types are not always clear-cut, and some researchers believe the signs and symptoms reflect a spectrum instead of distinct types. Cockayne syndrome type II is also known as cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal (COFS) syndrome, and while some researchers consider it to be a separate but similar condition, others classify it as part of the Cockayne syndrome disease spectrum. Frequency Cockayne syndrome is estimated to occur in 2 to 3 per million newborns in the United States and Europe. Causes Cockayne syndrome can result from mutations in either the ERCC6 gene (also known as CSB ) or the ERCC8 gene (also known as CSA ). These genes provide instructions for making proteins that are involved in repairing damaged DNA . DNA can be damaged by ultraviolet (UV) rays from the sun and by toxic chemicals, radiation, and unstable molecules called free radicals. Cells are usually able to fix DNA damage before it causes problems. However, in people with Cockayne syndrome, DNA damage is not repaired normally. As errors build up in DNA, cells malfunction and eventually die. The faulty DNA repair underlies photosensitivity in affected individuals, and researchers suspect that it also contributes to the other features of Cockayne syndrome. It is unclear how ERCC6 or ERCC8 gene mutations cause all of the varied features of this condition. Learn more about the genes associated with Cockayne syndrome ERCC6 ERCC8 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition CS Dwarfism-retinal atrophy-deafness syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Cockayne syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Cockayne syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM COCKAYNE SYNDROME B; CSB CEREBROOCULOFACIOSKELETAL SYNDROME 1; COFS1 COCKAYNE SYNDROME A; CSA Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Cleaver JE, Lam ET, Revet I. Disorders of nucleotide excision repair: the
genetic and molecular basis of heterogeneity. Nat Rev Genet. 2009
Nov;10(11):756-68. doi: 10.1038/nrg2663. Epub 2009 Oct 7. Citation on PubMed Laugel V. Cockayne Syndrome. 2000 Dec 28 [updated 2024 Aug 29]. In: Adam MP,
Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington,
Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1342/ Citation on PubMed Laugel V. Cockayne syndrome: the expanding clinical and mutational spectrum.
Mech Ageing Dev. 2013 May-Jun;134(5-6):161-70. doi: 10.1016/j.mad.2013.02.006.
Epub 2013 Feb 18. Citation on PubMed Nance MA, Berry SA. Cockayne syndrome: review of 140 cases. Am J Med Genet.
1992 Jan 1;42(1):68-84. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320420115. Citation on PubMed Weidenheim KM, Dickson DW, Rapin I. Neuropathology of Cockayne syndrome:
Evidence for impaired development, premature aging, and neurodegeneration. Mech
Ageing Dev. 2009 Sep;130(9):619-36. doi: 10.1016/j.mad.2009.07.006. Epub 2009 Jul
30. Citation on PubMed Wilson BT, Stark Z, Sutton RE, Danda S, Ekbote AV, Elsayed SM, Gibson L,
Goodship JA, Jackson AP, Keng WT, King MD, McCann E, Motojima T, Murray JE, Omata
T, Pilz D, Pope K, Sugita K, White SM, Wilson IJ. The Cockayne Syndrome Natural
History (CoSyNH) study: clinical findings in 102 individuals and recommendations
for care. Genet Med. 2016 May;18(5):483-93. doi: 10.1038/gim.2015.110. Epub 2015
Jul 23. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Wilson BT, Strong A, O'Kelly S, Munkley J, Stark Z. Metronidazole Toxicity in
Cockayne Syndrome: A Case Series. Pediatrics. 2015 Sep;136(3):e706-8. doi:
10.1542/peds.2015-0531. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Growth Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Failure to thrive Genetics Microcephaly Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 1, 2016