Ethylmalonic encephalopathy: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Ethylmalonic encephalopathy URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/ethylmalonic-encephalopathy/ Ethylmalonic encephalopathy To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Ethylmalonic encephalopathy is an inherited disorder that affects several body systems, particularly the nervous system. Neurological signs and symptoms include delayed development and the loss of previously acquired skills (developmental regression), weak muscle tone (hypotonia), seizures, and abnormal movements. The body's network of blood vessels (the vascular system) is also affected. Children with this disorder often develop rashes of tiny red spots (petechiae) caused by bleeding under the skin and blue discoloration in the hands and feet due to reduced oxygen in the blood (acrocyanosis). Chronic diarrhea is another common feature of ethylmalonic encephalopathy. The signs and symptoms of ethylmalonic encephalopathy are apparent at birth or begin in the first few months of life. Problems with the nervous system typically worsen over time, and most affected individuals survive only into early childhood. Frequency About 70 individuals with this condition have been identified worldwide, mostly in Mediterranean and Arab populations. Although ethylmalonic encephalopathy appears to be very rare, researchers suggest that some cases have been misdiagnosed as other neurological disorders. Causes Ethylmalonic encephalopathy results from mutations in the ETHE1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme that is active in mitochondria , which are the energy-producing centers in cells. The ETHE1 enzyme is part of a pathway that breaks down sulfide (H 2 S), a molecule that is critical at very low levels for normal cell functioning but is toxic at high levels. Excess sulfide interferes with numerous cell activities, including mitochondrial energy production. Mutations in the ETHE1 gene lead to the production of a nonfunctional version of the enzyme or prevent any enzyme from being made. A shortage of functional ETHE1 enzyme prevents sulfide from being broken down, allowing this molecule to accumulate in cells. The buildup of sulfide interferes with the ability of mitochondria to produce energy and damages tissues and organs throughout the body. Researchers believe that the effects of excess sulfide in the brain, muscles, blood vessels, and lining of the intestines underlie most of the major features of ethylmalonic encephalopathy. Learn more about the gene associated with Ethylmalonic encephalopathy ETHE1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Encephalopathy, petechiae, and ethylmalonic aciduria EPEMA syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Ethylmalonic encephalopathy Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Ethylmalonic encephalopathy Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM ENCEPHALOPATHY, ETHYLMALONIC; EE Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Di Meo I, Fagiolari G, Prelle A, Viscomi C, Zeviani M, Tiranti V. Chronic
exposure to sulfide causes accelerated degradation of cytochrome c oxidase in
ethylmalonic encephalopathy. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2011 Jul 15;15(2):353-62.
doi: 10.1089/ars.2010.3520. Epub 2011 Feb 25. Citation on PubMed Drousiotou A, DiMeo I, Mineri R, Georgiou T, Stylianidou G, Tiranti V.
Ethylmalonic encephalopathy: application of improved biochemical and molecular
diagnostic approaches. Clin Genet. 2011 Apr;79(4):385-90. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-0004.2010.01457.x. Citation on PubMed Garcia-Silva MT, Ribes A, Campos Y, Garavaglia B, Arenas J. Syndrome of
encephalopathy, petechiae, and ethylmalonic aciduria. Pediatr Neurol. 1997
Sep;17(2):165-70. doi: 10.1016/s0887-8994(97)00048-9. Citation on PubMed Tiranti V, Briem E, Lamantea E, Mineri R, Papaleo E, De Gioia L, Forlani F,
Rinaldo P, Dickson P, Abu-Libdeh B, Cindro-Heberle L, Owaidha M, Jack RM,
Christensen E, Burlina A, Zeviani M. ETHE1 mutations are specific to ethylmalonic
encephalopathy. J Med Genet. 2006 Apr;43(4):340-6. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2005.036210.
Epub 2005 Sep 23. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Tiranti V, D'Adamo P, Briem E, Ferrari G, Mineri R, Lamantea E, Mandel H,
Balestri P, Garcia-Silva MT, Vollmer B, Rinaldo P, Hahn SH, Leonard J, Rahman S,
Dionisi-Vici C, Garavaglia B, Gasparini P, Zeviani M. Ethylmalonic encephalopathy
is caused by mutations in ETHE1, a gene encoding a mitochondrial matrix protein.
Am J Hum Genet. 2004 Feb;74(2):239-52. doi: 10.1086/381653. Epub 2004 Jan 19. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Tiranti V, Viscomi C, Hildebrandt T, Di Meo I, Mineri R, Tiveron C, Levitt MD,
Prelle A, Fagiolari G, Rimoldi M, Zeviani M. Loss of ETHE1, a mitochondrial
dioxygenase, causes fatal sulfide toxicity in ethylmalonic encephalopathy. Nat
Med. 2009 Feb;15(2):200-5. doi: 10.1038/nm.1907. Epub 2009 Jan 11. Erratum In:
Nat Med. 2009 Feb;15(2):220. Citation on PubMed Tiranti V, Zeviani M. Altered sulfide (H(2)S) metabolism in ethylmalonic
encephalopathy. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2013 Jan 1;5(1):a011437. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a011437. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Genetic Brain Disorders Genetic Disorders Mitochondrial Diseases Newborn Screening MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Blue discoloration of the skin Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2017