Sialuria: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Sialuria URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/sialuria/ Sialuria To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Sialuria is a rare disorder that affects development. Infants with sialuria are often born with a yellow tint to the skin and the whites of the eyes (neonatal jaundice), an enlarged liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly), and unusually small red blood cells (microcytic anemia).  They may develop a somewhat flat face and distinctive-looking facial features that are described as "coarse." Temporarily delayed development and weak muscle tone (hypotonia) have also been reported. Young children with sialuria tend to have frequent upper respiratory infections and episodes of dehydration and stomach upset (gastroenteritis).  Older children may have seizures and learning difficulties.  In some affected children, intellectual development is nearly normal. The features of sialuria vary widely among affected people.  Many of the problems associated with this disorder appear to improve with age, although little is known about the long-term effects of the disease.  It is likely that some adults with sialuria never come to medical attention because they have very mild signs and symptoms or no health problems related to the condition. Frequency Fewer than 20 cases of sialuria have been described worldwide. There are probably more people with the disorder who have not been diagnosed, as sialuria can be difficult to detect because of its variable features. Causes Variants (also called mutations) in the GNE gene cause sialuria. The GNE gene provides instructions for making an enzyme found in cells and tissues throughout the body. This enzyme is involved in a chemical pathway that produces sialic acid, which is a simple sugar that attaches to the ends of more complex molecules on the surface of cells. By modifying these molecules, sialic acid influences a wide variety of cellular functions, including cell movement (migration), the attachment of cells to one another (adhesion), signaling between cells, and inflammation. A feedback system helps control the amount of sialic acid produced in cells. This system shuts off the enzyme produced from the GNE gene when no more sialic acid is needed.  The variants responsible for sialuria disrupt this feedback mechanism, resulting in an overproduction of sialic acid. This simple sugar builds up within cells and is excreted in urine. Researchers are working to determine how an accumulation of sialic acid in the body interferes with normal development in people with sialuria. Learn more about the gene associated with Sialuria GNE Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Most reported cases have occurred in people with no known history of the disorder in their family. These cases may represent new (de novo) variants in the gene that occur during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) in an affected individual's parent or during early embryonic development. Other Names for This Condition French type sialuria Sialuria, French type Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Sialuria Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Sialuria Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM SIALURIA Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Enns GM, Seppala R, Musci TJ, Weisiger K, Ferrell LD, Wenger DA, Gahl WA,
Packman S. Clinical course and biochemistry of sialuria. J Inherit Metab Dis.
2001 Jun;24(3):328-36. doi: 10.1023/a:1010588115479. Citation on PubMed Leroy JG, Seppala R, Huizing M, Dacremont G, De Simpel H, Van Coster RN,
Orvisky E, Krasnewich DM, Gahl WA. Dominant inheritance of sialuria, an inborn
error of feedback inhibition. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Jun;68(6):1419-27. doi:
10.1086/320598. Epub 2001 Apr 18. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Leroy JG. Sialuria - RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY. 2004 Jan
14 [updated 2012 Oct 18]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace
SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA):
University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1164/ Citation on PubMed Seppala R, Lehto VP, Gahl WA. Mutations in the human UDP-N-acetylglucosamine
2-epimerase gene define the disease sialuria and the allosteric site of the
enzyme. Am J Hum Genet. 1999 Jun;64(6):1563-9. doi: 10.1086/302411. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Strehle EM. Sialic acid storage disease and related disorders. Genet Test.
2003 Summer;7(2):113-21. doi: 10.1089/109065703322146795. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Metabolic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Hepatosplenomegaly (Image) Newborn jaundice Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 6, 2024