Senior-Løken syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Senior-Løken syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/senior-loken-syndrome/ Senior-Løken syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Senior-Løken syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by the combination of two specific features: a kidney condition called nephronophthisis and an eye condition known as Leber congenital amaurosis . Nephronophthisis causes fluid-filled cysts to develop in the kidneys beginning in childhood. These cysts impair kidney function, initially causing increased urine production (polyuria), excessive thirst (polydipsia), general weakness, and extreme tiredness (fatigue). Nephronophthisis leads to end-stage renal disease (ESRD) later in childhood or in adolescence. ESRD is a life-threatening failure of kidney function that occurs when the kidneys are no longer able to filter fluids and waste products from the body effectively. Leber congenital amaurosis primarily affects the retina, which is the specialized tissue at the back of the eye that detects light and color. This condition causes vision problems, including an increased sensitivity to light (photophobia), involuntary movements of the eyes (nystagmus), and extreme farsightedness ( hyperopia ). Some people with Senior-Løken syndrome  develop the signs of Leber congenital amaurosis within the first few years of life, while others do not develop vision problems until later in childhood. Frequency Senior-Løken syndrome is a rare disorder, with an estimated prevalence of about 1 in 1 million people worldwide. Only a few families with the condition have been described in the medical literature. Causes Senior-Løken syndrome can be caused by mutations in one of at least five genes. The proteins produced from these genes are known or suspected to play roles in cell structures called cilia . Cilia are microscopic, finger-like projections that stick out from the surface of cells; they are involved in signaling pathways that transmit information between cells. Cilia are important for the structure and function of many types of cells, including certain cells in the kidneys. They are also necessary for the perception of sensory input (such as vision, hearing, and smell). Mutations in the genes associated with Senior-Løken syndrome likely lead to problems with the structure and function of cilia. Defects in these cell structures probably disrupt important chemical signaling pathways within cells. Although researchers believe that defective cilia are responsible for the features of this disorder, it remains unclear how they lead specifically to nephronophthisis and Leber congenital amaurosis. Some people with Senior-Løken syndrome  do not have identified mutations in one of the five genes known to be associated with the condition. In these cases, the genetic cause of the disorder is unknown. Learn more about the genes associated with Senior-Løken syndrome CEP290 NPHP1 WDR19 Additional Information from NCBI Gene: IQCB1 NPHP4 SDCCAG8 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Loken-Senior syndrome Renal dysplasia and retinal aplasia Renal-retinal syndrome Senior-Loken syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Senior-Loken syndrome 1 Genetic Testing Registry: Senior-Loken syndrome 3 Genetic Testing Registry: Senior-Loken syndrome 4 Genetic Testing Registry: Senior-Loken syndrome 5 Genetic Testing Registry: Senior-Loken syndrome 6 Genetic Testing Registry: Senior-Loken syndrome 7 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Senior-Loken syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM SENIOR-LOKEN SYNDROME 1; SLSN1 SENIOR-LOKEN SYNDROME 3; SLSN3 SENIOR-LOKEN SYNDROME 4; SLSN4 SENIOR-LOKEN SYNDROME 6; SLSN6 SENIOR-LOKEN SYNDROME 5; SLSN5 SENIOR-LOKEN SYNDROME 7; SLSN7 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Caridi G, Murer L, Bellantuono R, Sorino P, Caringella DA, Gusmano R, Ghiggeri
GM. Renal-retinal syndromes: association of retinal anomalies and recessive
nephronophthisis in patients with homozygous deletion of the NPH1 locus. Am J
Kidney Dis. 1998 Dec;32(6):1059-62. doi: 10.1016/s0272-6386(98)70083-6. Citation on PubMed Otto E, Hoefele J, Ruf R, Mueller AM, Hiller KS, Wolf MT, Schuermann MJ,
Becker A, Birkenhager R, Sudbrak R, Hennies HC, Nurnberg P, Hildebrandt F. A gene
mutated in nephronophthisis and retinitis pigmentosa encodes a novel protein,
nephroretinin, conserved in evolution. Am J Hum Genet. 2002 Nov;71(5):1161-7.
doi: 10.1086/344395. Epub 2002 Aug 29. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Otto EA, Hurd TW, Airik R, Chaki M, Zhou W, Stoetzel C, Patil SB, Levy S,
Ghosh AK, Murga-Zamalloa CA, van Reeuwijk J, Letteboer SJ, Sang L, Giles RH, Liu
Q, Coene KL, Estrada-Cuzcano A, Collin RW, McLaughlin HM, Held S, Kasanuki JM,
Ramaswami G, Conte J, Lopez I, Washburn J, Macdonald J, Hu J, Yamashita Y, Maher
ER, Guay-Woodford LM, Neumann HP, Obermuller N, Koenekoop RK, Bergmann C, Bei X,
Lewis RA, Katsanis N, Lopes V, Williams DS, Lyons RH, Dang CV, Brito DA, Dias MB,
Zhang X, Cavalcoli JD, Nurnberg G, Nurnberg P, Pierce EA, Jackson PK, Antignac C,
Saunier S, Roepman R, Dollfus H, Khanna H, Hildebrandt F. Candidate exome capture
identifies mutation of SDCCAG8 as the cause of a retinal-renal ciliopathy. Nat
Genet. 2010 Oct;42(10):840-50. doi: 10.1038/ng.662. Epub 2010 Sep 12. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Otto EA, Loeys B, Khanna H, Hellemans J, Sudbrak R, Fan S, Muerb U, O'Toole
JF, Helou J, Attanasio M, Utsch B, Sayer JA, Lillo C, Jimeno D, Coucke P, De
Paepe A, Reinhardt R, Klages S, Tsuda M, Kawakami I, Kusakabe T, Omran H, Imm A,
Tippens M, Raymond PA, Hill J, Beales P, He S, Kispert A, Margolis B, Williams
DS, Swaroop A, Hildebrandt F. Nephrocystin-5, a ciliary IQ domain protein, is
mutated in Senior-Loken syndrome and interacts with RPGR and calmodulin. Nat
Genet. 2005 Mar;37(3):282-8. doi: 10.1038/ng1520. Epub 2005 Feb 20. Citation on PubMed Stone EM, Cideciyan AV, Aleman TS, Scheetz TE, Sumaroka A, Ehlinger MA,
Schwartz SB, Fishman GA, Traboulsi EI, Lam BL, Fulton AB, Mullins RF, Sheffield
VC, Jacobson SG. Variations in NPHP5 in patients with nonsyndromic leber
congenital amaurosis and Senior-Loken syndrome. Arch Ophthalmol. 2011
Jan;129(1):81-7. doi: 10.1001/archophthalmol.2010.330. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Warady BA, Cibis G, Alon U, Blowey D, Hellerstein S. Senior-Loken syndrome:
revisited. Pediatrics. 1994 Jul;94(1):111-2. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Kidney Diseases Retinal Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease End-stage kidney disease Genetics Nystagmus Photophobia Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 1, 2012