Isolated growth hormone deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Isolated growth hormone deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/isolated-growth-hormone-deficiency/ Isolated growth hormone deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Isolated growth hormone deficiency is a condition caused by a severe shortage or absence of growth hormone. Growth hormone is a protein that is necessary for the normal growth of the body's bones and tissues. Because they do not have enough of this hormone, people with isolated growth hormone deficiency commonly experience a failure to grow at the expected rate and have unusually short stature. This condition is usually apparent by early childhood. There are four types of isolated growth hormone deficiency differentiated by the severity of the condition, the gene involved, and the inheritance pattern. Isolated growth hormone deficiency type IA is caused by an absence of growth hormone and is the most severe of all the types. In people with type IA, growth failure is evident in infancy as affected babies are shorter than normal at birth. People with isolated growth hormone deficiency type IB produce very low levels of growth hormone. As a result, type IB is characterized by short stature, but this growth failure is typically not as severe as in type IA. Growth failure in people with type IB is usually apparent in early to mid-childhood. Individuals with isolated growth hormone deficiency type II have very low levels of growth hormone and short stature that varies in severity. Growth failure in these individuals is usually evident in early to mid-childhood. It is estimated that nearly half of the individuals with type II have underdevelopment of the pituitary gland (pituitary hypoplasia). The pituitary gland is located at the base of the brain and produces many hormones, including growth hormone. Isolated growth hormone deficiency type III is similar to type II in that affected individuals have very low levels of growth hormone and short stature that varies in severity. Growth failure in type III is usually evident in early to mid-childhood. People with type III may also have a weakened immune system and are prone to frequent infections. They produce very few B cells, which are specialized white blood cells that help protect the body against infection (agammaglobulinemia). Frequency The incidence of isolated growth hormone deficiency is estimated to be 1 in 4,000 to 10,000 individuals worldwide. Causes Isolated growth hormone deficiency is caused by mutations in one of at least three genes. Isolated growth hormone deficiency types IA and II are caused by mutations in the GH1 gene. Type IB is caused by mutations in either the GH1 or GHRHR gene. Type III is caused by mutations in the BTK gene. The GH1 gene provides instructions for making the growth hormone protein. Growth hormone is produced in the pituitary gland and plays a major role in promoting the body's growth. Growth hormone also plays a role in various chemical reactions (metabolic processes) in the body. Mutations in the GH1 gene prevent or impair the production of growth hormone. Without sufficient growth hormone, the body fails to grow at its normal rate, resulting in slow growth and short stature as seen in isolated growth hormone deficiency types IA, IB, and II. The GHRHR gene provides instructions for making a protein called the growth hormone releasing hormone receptor. This receptor attaches (binds) to a molecule called growth hormone releasing hormone. The binding of growth hormone releasing hormone to the receptor triggers the production of growth hormone and its release from the pituitary gland. Mutations in the GHRHR gene impair the production or release of growth hormone. The resulting shortage of growth hormone prevents the body from growing at the expected rate. Decreased growth hormone activity due to GHRHR gene mutations is responsible for many cases of isolated growth hormone deficiency type IB. The BTK gene provides instructions for making a protein called Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK), which is essential for the development and maturation of immune system cells called B cells . The BTK protein transmits important chemical signals that instruct B cells to mature and produce special proteins called antibodies . Antibodies attach to specific foreign particles and germs, marking them for destruction. It is unknown how mutations in the BTK gene contribute to short stature in people with isolated growth hormone deficiency type III. Some people with isolated growth hormone deficiency do not have mutations in the GH1 , GHRHR , or BTK genes. In these individuals, the cause of the condition is unknown. When this condition does not have an identified genetic cause, it is known as idiopathic isolated growth hormone deficiency. Learn more about the genes associated with Isolated growth hormone deficiency BTK GH1 GHRHR Inheritance Isolated growth hormone deficiency can have different inheritance patterns depending on the type of the condition. Isolated growth hormone deficiency types IA and IB are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the GH1 or GHRHR gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Isolated growth hormone deficiency type II can be inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means a mutation in one copy of the GH1 gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. This condition can also result from new mutations in the GH1 gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Isolated growth hormone deficiency type III, caused by mutations in the BTK gene, is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern . The BTK gene is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons. Other Names for This Condition Dwarfism, growth hormone deficiency Dwarfism, pituitary Growth hormone deficiency dwarfism Isolated GH deficiency Isolated HGH deficiency Isolated human growth hormone deficiency Isolated somatotropin deficiency Isolated somatotropin deficiency disorder Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Ateleiotic dwarfism Genetic Testing Registry: Autosomal dominant isolated somatotropin deficiency Genetic Testing Registry: Isolated growth hormone deficiency type IB Genetic Testing Registry: X-linked agammaglobulinemia with growth hormone deficiency Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Non-acquired isolated growth hormone deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE IA; IGHD1A ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE II; IGHD2 ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE III, WITH AGAMMAGLOBULINEMIA; IGHD3 ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE IB; IGHD1B Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Alatzoglou KS, Dattani MT. Genetic causes and treatment of isolated growth
hormone deficiency-an update. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2010 Oct;6(10):562-76. doi:
10.1038/nrendo.2010.147. Citation on PubMed Alatzoglou KS, Turton JP, Kelberman D, Clayton PE, Mehta A, Buchanan C, Aylwin
S, Crowne EC, Christesen HT, Hertel NT, Trainer PJ, Savage MO, Raza J, Banerjee
K, Sinha SK, Ten S, Mushtaq T, Brauner R, Cheetham TD, Hindmarsh PC, Mullis PE,
Dattani MT. Expanding the spectrum of mutations in GH1 and GHRHR: genetic
screening in a large cohort of patients with congenital isolated growth hormone
deficiency. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Sep;94(9):3191-9. doi:
10.1210/jc.2008-2783. Epub 2009 Jun 30. Citation on PubMed Hamid R, Phillips JA 3rd, Holladay C, Cogan JD, Austin ED, Backeljauw PF,
Travers SH, Patton JG. A molecular basis for variation in clinical severity of
isolated growth hormone deficiency type II. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009
Dec;94(12):4728-34. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-0746. Epub 2009 Oct 16. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Mullis PE. Genetic control of growth. Eur J Endocrinol. 2005 Jan;152(1):11-31.
doi: 10.1530/eje.1.01797. Citation on PubMed Mullis PE. Genetics of isolated growth hormone deficiency. J Clin Res Pediatr
Endocrinol. 2010;2(2):52-62. doi: 10.4274/jcrpe.v2i2.52. Epub 2010 May 1. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Seaver LH, Irons M; American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) Professional
Practice and Guidelines Committee. ACMG practice guideline: genetic evaluation of
short stature. Genet Med. 2009 Jun;11(6):465-70. doi:
10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181a7e8f8. Erratum In: Genet Med. 2009 Oct;11(10):765. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Wit JM, Kiess W, Mullis P. Genetic evaluation of short stature. Best Pract Res
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Feb;25(1):1-17. doi: 10.1016/j.beem.2010.06.007. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Dwarfism Endocrine Diseases Genetic Disorders Growth Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Growth hormone deficiency - children Growth hormone test Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2012