Platyspondylic dysplasia, Torrance type: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Platyspondylic dysplasia, Torrance type URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/platyspondylic-dysplasia-torrance-type/ Platyspondylic dysplasia, Torrance type To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Platyspondylic dysplasia, Torrance type is a severe disorder of bone growth. Infants with this condition have very short arms and legs, severely flattened bones of the spine (platyspondyly), and unusually short fingers and toes (brachydactyly). Affected individuals also tend to have a small chest with short ribs that can restrict the growth and expansion of the lungs. The serious health problems seen in infants with platyspondylic dysplasia, Torrance type often result in death before birth or shortly thereafter; respiratory failure is a common cause of death. Frequency Platyspondylic dysplasia, Torrance type is very rare, though the exact prevalence is unknown. Causes Platyspondylic dysplasia, Torrance type is caused by variants (also called mutations) in the COL2A1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making the alpha-1(II) chain, which is a component of type II collagen. This type of collagen is found in the clear gel that fills the eyeball (the vitreous) and in cartilage. Cartilage is a tough, flexible tissue that makes up much of the skeleton during early development; most cartilage is later converted to bone. Type II collagen is essential for the normal growth and development of bones and other connective tissues . Most of the COL2A1 variants that cause platyspondylic dysplasia, Torrance type affect a region of the protein called the C-propeptide domain. These variants cause the cell to produce an abnormal version of the COL2A1 protein, which interferes with the formation of mature type II collagen molecules. In some cases, the abnormal alpha-1(II) chains build up in cartilage-forming cells (chondrocytes). Without enough functioning type II collagen, bones and other connective tissues cannot develop properly, leading to the skeletal abnormalities seen in infants with platyspondylic dysplasia, Torrance type. Learn more about the gene associated with Platyspondylic dysplasia, Torrance type COL2A1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. This condition is usually the result of a new (de novo) variant in the gene that occurs during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) in an affected individual's parent or during early embryonic development. These affected individuals typically have no history of the disorder in their family. However, in some cases, a parent has been found to carry the same variant in a small number of their cells, which is known as somatic mosaicism . Other Names for This Condition Platyspondylic dysplasia, Torrance-Luton type Platyspondylic dysplasia, type Torrance, COL2A1-related Platyspondylic lethal skeletal dysplasia, Torrance type PLSD-T Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Platyspondylic dysplasia, Torrance type Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Platyspondylic dysplasia, Torrance type Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PLATYSPONDYLIC LETHAL SKELETAL DYSPLASIA, TORRANCE TYPE; PLSDT Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Gregersen PA, Savarirayan R. Type II Collagen Disorders Overview. 2019 Apr 25
[updated 2024 Oct 24]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE,
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University
of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK540447/ Citation on PubMed Neumann L, Kunze J, Uhl M, Stover B, Zabel B, Spranger J. Survival to
adulthood and dominant inheritance of platyspondylic skeletal dysplasia,
Torrance-Luton type. Pediatr Radiol. 2003 Nov;33(11):786-90. doi:
10.1007/s00247-003-1055-x. Epub 2003 Sep 5. Citation on PubMed Nishimura G, Nakashima E, Mabuchi A, Shimamoto K, Shimamoto T, Shimao Y, Nagai
T, Yamaguchi T, Kosaki R, Ohashi H, Makita Y, Ikegawa S. Identification of COL2A1
mutations in platyspondylic skeletal dysplasia, Torrance type. J Med Genet. 2004
Jan;41(1):75-9. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2003.013722. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Okamoto T, Nagaya K, Asai H, Tsuchida E, Nohara F, Hayashi T, Yamashita A,
Nishimura G, Azuma H. Platyspondylic lethal dysplasia torrance type with a
heterozygous mutation in the triple helical domain of COL2A1 in two sibs from
phenotypically normal parents. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Aug;158A(8):1953-6. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.35509. Epub 2012 Jun 18. Citation on PubMed Zankl A, Neumann L, Ignatius J, Nikkels P, Schrander-Stumpel C, Mortier G,
Omran H, Wright M, Hilbert K, Bonafe L, Spranger J, Zabel B, Superti-Furga A.
Dominant negative mutations in the C-propeptide of COL2A1 cause platyspondylic
lethal skeletal dysplasia, torrance type, and define a novel subfamily within the
type 2 collagenopathies. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Feb 15;133A(1):61-7. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.30531. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Bone Diseases Connective Tissue Disorders Dwarfism Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Lordosis - lumbar Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 19, 2024