Congenital contractural arachnodactyly: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Congenital contractural arachnodactyly URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/congenital-contractural-arachnodactyly/ Congenital contractural arachnodactyly To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Congenital contractural arachnodactyly is a disorder that affects many parts of the body.  People with this condition typically are tall with long limbs (dolichostenomelia) and long, slender fingers and toes (arachnodactyly). They often have permanently bent joints (contractures) that can restrict movement in their hips, knees, ankles, or elbows. Additional features of congenital contractural arachnodactyly include underdeveloped muscles, a rounded upper back that also curves to the side ( kyphoscoliosis ), permanently bent fingers and toes ( camptodactyly ), ears that look "crumpled," and a protruding chest ( pectus carinatum ). Rarely, people with congenital contractural arachnodactyly have heart defects such as an enlargement of the blood vessel that distributes blood from the heart to the rest of the body (aortic root dilatation) or a leak in one of the valves that control blood flow through the heart (mitral valve prolapse). The life expectancy of individuals with congenital contractural arachnodactyly varies depending on the severity of symptoms but is typically not shortened. A rare, severe form of congenital contractural arachnodactyly involves both heart and digestive system abnormalities in addition to the skeletal features described above; individuals with this severe form of the condition usually do not live past infancy. Frequency The prevalence of congenital contractural arachnodactyly is estimated to be less than 1 in 10,000 worldwide. Causes Mutations in the FBN2 gene cause congenital contractural arachnodactyly.  The FBN2 gene provides instructions for producing the fibrillin-2 protein.  Fibrillin-2 binds to other proteins and molecules to form threadlike filaments called microfibrils. Microfibrils become part of the fibers that provide strength and flexibility to connective tissue that supports the body's joints and organs. Additionally, microfibrils regulate the activity of molecules called growth factors. Growth factors enable the growth and repair of tissues throughout the body. Mutations in the FBN2 gene can decrease fibrillin-2 production or result in the production of a protein with impaired function. As a result, microfibril formation is reduced, which probably weakens the structure of connective tissue and disrupts regulation of growth factor activity. The resulting abnormalities of connective tissue underlie the signs and symptoms of congenital contractural arachnodactyly. Learn more about the gene associated with Congenital contractural arachnodactyly FBN2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition Arthrogyroposis, distal, type 9 Beals syndrome Beals-Hecht syndrome CCA Contractural arachnodactyly, congenital DA9 Distal arthrogyropsis type 9 Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital contractural arachnodactyly Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Congenital contractural arachnodactyly Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CONTRACTURAL ARACHNODACTYLY, CONGENITAL; CCA Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Callewaert BL, Loeys BL, Ficcadenti A, Vermeer S, Landgren M, Kroes HY, Yaron
Y, Pope M, Foulds N, Boute O, Galan F, Kingston H, Van der Aa N, Salcedo I,
Swinkels ME, Wallgren-Pettersson C, Gabrielli O, De Backer J, Coucke PJ, De Paepe
AM. Comprehensive clinical and molecular assessment of 32 probands with
congenital contractural arachnodactyly: report of 14 novel mutations and review
of the literature. Hum Mutat. 2009 Mar;30(3):334-41. doi: 10.1002/humu.20854. Citation on PubMed Gupta PA, Putnam EA, Carmical SG, Kaitila I, Steinmann B, Child A, Danesino C,
Metcalfe K, Berry SA, Chen E, Delorme CV, Thong MK, Ades LC, Milewicz DM. Ten
novel FBN2 mutations in congenital contractural arachnodactyly: delineation of
the molecular pathogenesis and clinical phenotype. Hum Mutat. 2002
Jan;19(1):39-48. doi: 10.1002/humu.10017. Citation on PubMed Gupta PA, Wallis DD, Chin TO, Northrup H, Tran-Fadulu VT, Towbin JA, Milewicz
DM. FBN2 mutation associated with manifestations of Marfan syndrome and
congenital contractural arachnodactyly. J Med Genet. 2004 May;41(5):e56. doi:
10.1136/jmg.2003.012880. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Nishimura A, Sakai H, Ikegawa S, Kitoh H, Haga N, Ishikiriyama S, Nagai T,
Takada F, Ohata T, Tanaka F, Kamasaki H, Saitsu H, Mizuguchi T, Matsumoto N.
FBN2, FBN1, TGFBR1, and TGFBR2 analyses in congenital contractural
arachnodactyly. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Apr 1;143A(7):694-8. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.31639. Citation on PubMed Tuncbilek E, Alanay Y. Congenital contractural arachnodactyly (Beals
syndrome). Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2006 Jun 1;1:20. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-20. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Connective Tissue Disorders Genetic Disorders Muscle Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Arachnodactyly Contracture deformity Genetics Skeletal limb abnormalities Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated July 1, 2013