Congenital deafness with labyrinthine aplasia, microtia, and microdontia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Congenital deafness with labyrinthine aplasia, microtia, and microdontia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/congenital-deafness-with-labyrinthine-aplasia-microtia-and-microdontia/ Congenital deafness with labyrinthine aplasia, microtia, and microdontia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Congenital deafness with labyrinthine aplasia, microtia, and microdontia (also called LAMM syndrome) is a condition that affects development of the ears and teeth. In people with this condition, the structures that form the inner ear are usually completely absent (labyrinthine aplasia). Rarely, affected individuals have some underdeveloped inner ear structures in one or both ears. The abnormalities of the inner ear cause a form of hearing loss called sensorineural deafness that is present from birth (congenital). Because the inner ear is important for balance as well as hearing, development of motor skills, such as sitting and crawling, may be delayed in affected infants. In addition, people with LAMM syndrome often have abnormally small outer ears ( microtia ) with narrow ear canals. They can also have unusually small, widely spaced teeth (microdontia). Frequency LAMM syndrome is a rare condition, although its prevalence is unknown. Approximately a dozen affected families have been identified. Causes LAMM syndrome is caused by mutations in the FGF3 gene, which provides instructions for making a protein called fibroblast growth factor 3 (FGF3). By attaching to another protein known as a receptor, the FGF3 protein triggers a cascade of chemical reactions inside the cell that signal the cell to undergo certain changes, such as dividing or maturing to take on specialized functions.  During development before birth, the signals triggered by the FGF3 protein stimulate cells to form the structures that make up the inner ears. The FGF3 protein is also involved in the development of many other organs and structures, including the outer ears and teeth. FGF3 gene mutations involved in LAMM syndrome alter the FGF3 protein. The altered protein likely has reduced or absent function and is unable to stimulate signaling. The loss of FGF3 function impairs development of the ears and teeth, which leads to the characteristic features of LAMM syndrome. Learn more about the gene associated with Congenital deafness with labyrinthine aplasia, microtia, and microdontia FGF3 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Congenital deafness with inner ear agenesis, microtia, and microdontia Deafness with LAMM LAMM syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Deafness with labyrinthine aplasia, microtia, and microdontia Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Deafness with labyrinthine aplasia, microtia, and microdontia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM DEAFNESS, CONGENITAL, WITH INNER EAR AGENESIS, MICROTIA, AND MICRODONTIA Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Alsmadi O, Meyer BF, Alkuraya F, Wakil S, Alkayal F, Al-Saud H, Ramzan K,
Al-Sayed M. Syndromic congenital sensorineural deafness, microtia and microdontia
resulting from a novel homoallelic mutation in fibroblast growth factor 3 (FGF3).
Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Jan;17(1):14-21. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.141. Epub 2008 Aug
13. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Ordonez J, Tekin M. Congenital Deafness with Labyrinthine Aplasia, Microtia,
and Microdontia. 2012 Sep 20 [updated 2019 Apr 4]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa
GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK100664/ Citation on PubMed Riazuddin S, Ahmed ZM, Hegde RS, Khan SN, Nasir I, Shaukat U, Riazuddin S,
Butman JA, Griffith AJ, Friedman TB, Choi BY. Variable expressivity of FGF3
mutations associated with deafness and LAMM syndrome. BMC Med Genet. 2011 Feb
9;12:21. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-12-21. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Tekin M, Hismi BO, Fitoz S, Ozdag H, Cengiz FB, Sirmaci A, Aslan I, Inceoglu
B, Yuksel-Konuk EB, Yilmaz ST, Yasun O, Akar N. Homozygous mutations in
fibroblast growth factor 3 are associated with a new form of syndromic deafness
characterized by inner ear agenesis, microtia, and microdontia. Am J Hum Genet.
2007 Feb;80(2):338-44. doi: 10.1086/510920. Epub 2006 Dec 27. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Tekin M, Ozturkmen Akay H, Fitoz S, Birnbaum S, Cengiz FB, Sennaroglu L,
Incesulu A, Yuksel Konuk EB, Hasanefendioglu Bayrak A, Senturk S, Cebeci I, Utine
GE, Tuncbilek E, Nance WE, Duman D. Homozygous FGF3 mutations result in
congenital deafness with inner ear agenesis, microtia, and microdontia. Clin
Genet. 2008 Jun;73(6):554-65. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2008.01004.x. Epub 2008
Apr 22. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Ear Disorders Genetic Disorders Hearing Disorders and Deafness Hearing Problems in Children MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Living with hearing loss Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated November 1, 2012