Factor V deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Factor V deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/factor-v-deficiency/ Factor V deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Factor V deficiency is a rare bleeding disorder. The signs and symptoms of this condition can begin at any age, although the most severe cases are apparent in childhood. Factor V deficiency commonly causes nosebleeds; easy bruising; bleeding under the skin; bleeding of the gums; and prolonged or excessive bleeding following surgery, trauma, or childbirth. Women with factor V deficiency can have heavy or prolonged menstrual bleeding (menorrhagia). Bleeding into joint spaces (hemarthrosis) can also occur, although it is rare. Severely affected individuals have an increased risk of bleeding inside the skull (intracranial hemorrhage), in the lungs (pulmonary hemorrhage), or in the gastrointestinal tract , which can be life-threatening. Frequency Factor V deficiency affects an estimated 1 in 1 million people. This condition is more common in countries such as Iran and southern India, where it occurs up to ten times more frequently than in western countries. Causes Factor V deficiency is usually caused by mutations in the F5 gene, which provides instructions for making a protein called coagulation factor V. This protein plays a critical role in the coagulation system, which is a series of chemical reactions that forms blood clots in response to injury. F5 gene mutations that cause factor V deficiency prevent the production of functional coagulation factor V or severely reduce the amount of the protein in the bloodstream. People with this condition typically have less than 10 percent of normal levels of coagulation factor V in their blood; the most severely affected individuals have less than 1 percent. A reduced amount of functional coagulation factor V prevents blood from clotting normally, causing episodes of abnormal bleeding that can be severe. Very rarely, a form of factor V deficiency is caused by abnormal antibodies that recognize coagulation factor V. Antibodies normally attach (bind) to specific foreign particles and germs, marking them for destruction, but the antibodies in this form of factor V deficiency attack a normal human protein, leading to its inactivation. These cases are called acquired factor V deficiency and usually occur in individuals who have been treated with substances that stimulate the production of anti-factor V antibodies, such as bovine thrombin used during surgical procedures. There is no known genetic cause for this form of the condition. Learn more about the gene associated with Factor V deficiency F5 Inheritance Factor V deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the F5 gene in each cell have mutations. Individuals with a mutation in a single copy of the F5 gene have a reduced amount of coagulation factor V in their blood and can have mild bleeding problems, although most have no related health effects. Other Names for This Condition Labile factor deficiency Owren disease Owren's disease Parahemophilia Proaccelerin deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital factor V deficiency Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Congenital factor V deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM FACTOR V DEFICIENCY Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Asselta R, Peyvandi F. Factor V deficiency. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2009
Jun;35(4):382-9. doi: 10.1055/s-0029-1225760. Epub 2009 Jul 13. Citation on PubMed Cutler JA, Patel R, Rangarajan S, Tait RC, Mitchell MJ. Molecular
characterization of 11 novel mutations in patients with heterozygous and
homozygous FV deficiency. Haemophilia. 2010 Nov;16(6):937-42. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2516.2010.02330.x. Citation on PubMed Delev D, Pavlova A, Heinz S, Seifried E, Oldenburg J. Factor 5 mutation
profile in German patients with homozygous and heterozygous factor V deficiency.
Haemophilia. 2009 Sep;15(5):1143-53. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2516.2009.02048.x. Epub
2009 May 26. Citation on PubMed Lak M, Sharifian R, Peyvandi F, Mannucci PM. Symptoms of inherited factor V
deficiency in 35 Iranian patients. Br J Haematol. 1998 Dec;103(4):1067-9. doi:
10.1046/j.1365-2141.1998.01077.x. Citation on PubMed Lippi G, Favaloro EJ, Montagnana M, Manzato F, Guidi GC, Franchini M.
Inherited and acquired factor V deficiency. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2011
Apr;22(3):160-6. doi: 10.1097/MBC.0b013e3283424883. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Bleeding Disorders Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Bleeding into the skin Blood Clot Formation (Image) Factor V deficiency Gastrointestinal bleeding Genetics Related Medical Tests Coagulation Factor Tests Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated May 1, 2013