Myotonia congenita: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Myotonia congenita URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/myotonia-congenita/ Myotonia congenita To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Myotonia congenita is a disorder that affects muscles used for movement (skeletal muscles). Beginning in childhood, people with this condition experience bouts of sustained muscle tensing (myotonia) that prevent muscles from relaxing normally.  Although myotonia can affect any skeletal muscles, including muscles of the face and tongue, it occurs most often in the legs. Myotonia causes muscle stiffness that can interfere with movement. In some people the stiffness is very mild, while in other cases it may be severe enough to interfere with walking, running, and other activities of daily life. These muscle problems are particularly noticeable during movement following a period of rest. Many affected individuals find that repeated movements can temporarily alleviate their muscle stiffness, a phenomenon known as the warm-up effect. The two major types of myotonia congenita are known as Thomsen disease and Becker disease. These conditions are distinguished by the severity of their symptoms and their patterns of inheritance. Becker disease usually appears later in childhood than Thomsen disease and causes more severe muscle stiffness, particularly in males. People with Becker disease often experience temporary attacks of muscle weakness, particularly in the arms and hands, brought on by movement after periods of rest. They may also develop mild, permanent muscle weakness over time. This muscle weakness is not seen in people with Thomsen disease. Frequency Myotonia congenita is estimated to affect 1 in 100,000 people worldwide.  This condition is more common in northern Scandinavia, where it occurs in approximately 1 in 10,000 people. Causes Mutations in the CLCN1 gene cause myotonia congenita. The CLCN1 gene provides instructions for making a protein that is critical for the normal function of skeletal muscle cells. For the body to move normally, skeletal muscles must tense (contract) and relax in a coordinated way. Muscle contraction and relaxation are controlled by the flow of charged atoms (ions) into and out of muscle cells. Specifically, the protein produced from the CLCN1 gene forms a channel that controls the flow of negatively charged chlorine atoms (chloride ions) into these cells. The main function of this channel is to stabilize the cells' electrical charge, which prevents muscles from contracting abnormally. Mutations in the CLCN1 gene alter the usual structure or function of chloride channels. The altered channels cannot properly regulate ion flow, reducing the movement of chloride ions into skeletal muscle cells. This disruption in chloride ion flow triggers prolonged muscle contractions, which are the hallmark of myotonia. Learn more about the gene associated with Myotonia congenita CLCN1 Inheritance The two forms of myotonia congenita have different patterns of inheritance.  Thomsen disease is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  In most cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition. Becker disease is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. Most often, the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Because several CLCN1 mutations can cause either Becker disease or Thomsen disease, doctors usually rely on characteristic signs and symptoms to distinguish the two forms of myotonia congenita. Other Names for This Condition Congenital myotonia Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital myotonia, autosomal dominant form Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital myotonia, autosomal recessive form Genetic Testing Registry: Batten-Turner congenital myopathy Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Thomsen and Becker disease Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MYOTONIA CONGENITA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT MYOTONIA CONGENITA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Chrestian N, Puymirat J, Bouchard JP, Dupre N. Myotonia congenita--a cause of
muscle weakness and stiffness. Nat Clin Pract Neurol. 2006 Jul;2(7):393-9; quiz
following 399. doi: 10.1038/ncpneuro0239. Citation on PubMed Colding-Jorgensen E. Phenotypic variability in myotonia congenita. Muscle
Nerve. 2005 Jul;32(1):19-34. doi: 10.1002/mus.20295. Citation on PubMed Duno M, Vissing J. Myotonia Congenita. 2005 Aug 3 [updated 2021 Feb 25]. In:
Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington,
Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1355/ Citation on PubMed Pusch M. Myotonia caused by mutations in the muscle chloride channel gene
CLCN1. Hum Mutat. 2002 Apr;19(4):423-34. doi: 10.1002/humu.10063. Citation on PubMed Sun C, Tranebjaerg L, Torbergsen T, Holmgren G, Van Ghelue M. Spectrum of
CLCN1 mutations in patients with myotonia congenita in Northern Scandinavia. Eur
J Hum Genet. 2001 Dec;9(12):903-9. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200736. Erratum In: Eur
J Hum Genet. 2010 Feb;18(2):264. Citation on PubMed Zhang J, George AL Jr, Griggs RC, Fouad GT, Roberts J, Kwiecinski H, Connolly
AM, Ptacek LJ. Mutations in the human skeletal muscle chloride channel gene
(CLCN1) associated with dominant and recessive myotonia congenita. Neurology.
1996 Oct;47(4):993-8. doi: 10.1212/wnl.47.4.993. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Muscle Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Myotonia congenita Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2020