ALG6-congenital disorder of glycosylation: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → ALG6-congenital disorder of glycosylation URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/alg6-congenital-disorder-of-glycosylation/ ALG6-congenital disorder of glycosylation To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description ALG6 -congenital disorder of glycosylation ( ALG6 -CDG, also known as congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ic) is an inherited condition that affects many parts of the body. The signs and symptoms of ALG6 -CDG vary widely among people with the condition. Individuals with ALG6 -CDG typically develop signs and symptoms of the condition during infancy. They may have difficulty gaining weight and growing at the expected rate (failure to thrive). Affected infants often have weak muscle tone (hypotonia) and developmental delay. People with ALG6 -CDG may have seizures, problems with coordination and balance (ataxia), or stroke-like episodes that involve an extreme lack of energy (lethargy) and temporary paralysis. They may also develop blood clotting disorders. Some individuals with ALG6 -CDG have eye abnormalities including eyes that do not look in the same direction (strabismus) and an eye disorder called retinitis pigmentosa , which causes vision loss. Females with ALG6 -CDG have hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, which affects the production of hormones that direct sexual development. As a result, most females with ALG6 -CDG do not go through puberty. Frequency The prevalence of ALG6 -CDG is unknown, but it is thought to be the second most common type of congenital disorder of glycosylation. More than 30 cases of ALG6 -CDG have been described in the scientific literature. Causes ALG6 -CDG is caused by mutations in the ALG6 gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme that is involved in a process called glycosylation. Glycosylation is the process by which sugar molecules (monosaccharides) and complex chains of sugar molecules (oligosaccharides) are added to proteins and fats. Glycosylation modifies proteins and fats so they can perform a wider variety of functions. The enzyme produced from the ALG6 gene transfers a simple sugar called glucose to the growing oligosaccharide. Once the correct number of sugar molecules are linked together, the oligosaccharide is attached to a protein or fat. ALG6 gene mutations lead to the production of an abnormal enzyme with reduced or no activity. Without a properly functioning enzyme, glycosylation cannot proceed normally, and oligosaccharides are incomplete. As a result, glycosylation is reduced or absent. The wide variety of signs and symptoms in ALG6 -CDG are likely due to impaired glycosylation of proteins and fats that are needed for normal function in many organs and tissues, including the brain , eyes , liver , and hormone-producing ( endocrine ) system. Learn more about the gene associated with ALG6-congenital disorder of glycosylation ALG6 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition ALG6-CDG Carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome type Ic Carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome type V CDG syndrome type Ic CDG1C CDGIc Congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ic Glucosyltransferase 1 deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: ALG6-congenital disorder of glycosylation 1C Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center ALG6-CDG Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ic; CDG1C Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Damen G, de Klerk H, Huijmans J, den Hollander J, Sinaasappel M.
Gastrointestinal and other clinical manifestations in 17 children with congenital
disorders of glycosylation type Ia, Ib, and Ic. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr.
2004 Mar;38(3):282-7. doi: 10.1097/00005176-200403000-00010. Citation on PubMed Grunewald S, Imbach T, Huijben K, Rubio-Gozalbo ME, Verrips A, de Klerk JB,
Stroink H, de Rijk-van Andel JF, Van Hove JL, Wendel U, Matthijs G, Hennet T,
Jaeken J, Wevers RA. Clinical and biochemical characteristics of congenital
disorder of glycosylation type Ic, the first recognized endoplasmic reticulum
defect in N-glycan synthesis. Ann Neurol. 2000 Jun;47(6):776-81. Citation on PubMed Imbach T, Burda P, Kuhnert P, Wevers RA, Aebi M, Berger EG, Hennet T. A
mutation in the human ortholog of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae ALG6 gene causes
carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome type-Ic. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
1999 Jun 8;96(12):6982-7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.12.6982. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Imbach T, Grunewald S, Schenk B, Burda P, Schollen E, Wevers RA, Jaeken J, de
Klerk JB, Berger EG, Matthijs G, Aebi M, Hennet T. Multi-allelic origin of
congenital disorder of glycosylation (CDG)-Ic. Hum Genet. 2000 May;106(5):538-45.
doi: 10.1007/s004390000293. Citation on PubMed Sparks SE, Krasnewich DM. Congenital Disorders of N-Linked Glycosylation and
Multiple Pathway Overview. 2005 Aug 15 [updated 2017 Jan 12]. In: Adam MP,
Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington,
Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1332/ Citation on PubMed Westphal V, Xiao M, Kwok PY, Freeze HH. Identification of a frequent variant
in ALG6, the cause of Congenital Disorder of Glycosylation-Ic. Hum Mutat. 2003
Nov;22(5):420-1. doi: 10.1002/humu.9195. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Metabolic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated May 1, 2014