Ornithine translocase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Ornithine translocase deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/ornithine-translocase-deficiency/ Ornithine translocase deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Ornithine translocase deficiency is an inherited disorder that causes ammonia and other substances to build up (accumulate) in the blood. Ammonia, which is formed when proteins are broken down in the body, is toxic if the levels become too high. The nervous system is especially sensitive to the effects of excess ammonia. Ornithine translocase deficiency varies widely in its severity and age of onset. Affected infants show signs and symptoms of ornithine translocase deficiency within days after birth. In most affected individuals, however, signs and symptoms of ornithine translocase deficiency do not appear until later in life, with health problems first appearing anytime from childhood to adulthood.  Later-onset forms of ornithine translocase deficiency are usually less severe than the infantile form. Infants with ornithine translocase deficiency may lack energy (be lethargic), refuse to eat, vomit frequently, or have poorly controlled breathing or body temperature. Seizures or unusual body movements are common in these individuals. Some people with this condition have intellectual disability or developmental delay, but others have normal intelligence. Severe cases may result in coma. Some people with later-onset ornithine translocase deficiency have episodes of vomiting, lethargy, problems with coordination (ataxia), vision problems, episodes of brain dysfunction (encephalopathy), developmental delay, learning disabilities, or stiffness caused by abnormal tensing of the muscles (spasticity). Affected individuals may have chronic liver problems and mild abnormal bleeding. Individuals with ornithine translocase deficiency often cannot tolerate high-protein foods, such as meat. Occasionally, high-protein meals or stress caused by illness or periods without food (fasting) may cause ammonia to accumulate more quickly in the blood. This rapid increase of ammonia likely leads to the signs and symptoms of ornithine translocase deficiency. While the signs and symptoms of ornithine translocase deficiency can vary greatly among affected individuals, proper treatment can prevent some complications from occurring and may improve quality of life. Frequency Ornithine translocase deficiency is a very rare disorder. More than 100 affected individuals have been described in the scientific literature. Causes Mutations in the SLC25A15 gene cause ornithine translocase deficiency. The SLC25A15 gene provides instructions for making a protein called mitochondrial ornithine transporter 1. This protein participates in the urea cycle , which is a sequence of biochemical reactions that occurs in liver cells. The urea cycle breaks down excess nitrogen, made when protein is broken down by the body, to make a compound called urea that is excreted by the kidneys in urine. Mitochondrial ornithine transporter 1 is located within the mitochondria (the energy-producing centers in cells), where the protein transports a molecule called ornithine so it can participate in the urea cycle. Mutations in the SLC25A15 gene cause the production of a mitochondrial ornithine transporter 1 with reduced or absent function. As a result, ornithine transport is impaired and the urea cycle cannot proceed normally. This causes, nitrogen to accumulate in the bloodstream in the form of toxic ammonia instead of being converted to less toxic urea and being excreted. Ammonia is especially damaging to the brain, and excess ammonia causes neurological problems and other signs and symptoms of ornithine translocase deficiency. Byproducts of impaired ornithine transport in people with this condition include the accumulation of a substance called ornithine in the blood (hyperornithinemia) and the excretion of a substance called homocitrulline in the urine (homocitrullinuria). Another version of the mitochondrial ornithine transporter protein is produced by a different gene. While this protein is not as abundant as mitochondrial ornithine transporter 1, it is thought that this other version of the protein may partially compensate for the loss of mitochondrial ornithine transporter 1 and contribute to the late age of onset and mild signs and symptoms in some affected individuals. Other factors, many unknown, also contribute to the variable severity of ornithine translocase deficiency. Because ornithine translocase deficiency is caused by problems with the urea cycle, it belongs to a class of genetic diseases called urea cycle disorders. Learn more about the gene associated with Ornithine translocase deficiency SLC25A15 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition HHH syndrome Hyperornithinaemia-hyperammonaemia-homocitrullinuria syndrome Hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinemia syndrome Hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria syndrome Triple H syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM HYPERORNITHINEMIA-HYPERAMMONEMIA-HOMOCITRULLINURIA SYNDROME; HHHS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Camacho JA, Mardach R, Rioseco-Camacho N, Ruiz-Pesini E, Derbeneva O, Andrade
D, Zaldivar F, Qu Y, Cederbaum SD. Clinical and functional characterization of a
human ORNT1 mutation (T32R) in the
hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria (HHH) syndrome. Pediatr Res.
2006 Oct;60(4):423-9. doi: 10.1203/01.pdr.0000238301.25938.f5. Epub 2006 Aug 28. Citation on PubMed Camacho JA, Obie C, Biery B, Goodman BK, Hu CA, Almashanu S, Steel G, Casey R,
Lambert M, Mitchell GA, Valle D.
Hyperornithinaemia-hyperammonaemia-homocitrullinuria syndrome is caused by
mutations in a gene encoding a mitochondrial ornithine transporter. Nat Genet.
1999 Jun;22(2):151-8. doi: 10.1038/9658. Citation on PubMed Camacho JA, Rioseco-Camacho N, Andrade D, Porter J, Kong J. Cloning and
characterization of human ORNT2: a second mitochondrial ornithine transporter
that can rescue a defective ORNT1 in patients with the
hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria syndrome, a urea cycle
disorder. Mol Genet Metab. 2003 Aug;79(4):257-71. doi:
10.1016/s1096-7192(03)00105-7. Citation on PubMed Haberle J, Boddaert N, Burlina A, Chakrapani A, Dixon M, Huemer M, Karall D,
Martinelli D, Crespo PS, Santer R, Servais A, Valayannopoulos V, Lindner M, Rubio
V, Dionisi-Vici C. Suggested guidelines for the diagnosis and management of urea
cycle disorders. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2012 May 29;7:32. doi:
10.1186/1750-1172-7-32. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Haberle J, Burlina A, Chakrapani A, Dixon M, Karall D, Lindner M, Mandel H,
Martinelli D, Pintos-Morell G, Santer R, Skouma A, Servais A, Tal G, Rubio V,
Huemer M, Dionisi-Vici C. Suggested guidelines for the diagnosis and management
of urea cycle disorders: First revision. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2019
Nov;42(6):1192-1230. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12100. Epub 2019 May 15. Citation on PubMed Martinelli D, Diodato D, Ponzi E, Monne M, Boenzi S, Bertini E, Fiermonte G,
Dionisi-Vici C. The hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria syndrome.
Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2015 Mar 11;10:29. doi: 10.1186/s13023-015-0242-9. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Miyamoto T, Kanazawa N, Kato S, Kawakami M, Inoue Y, Kuhara T, Inoue T,
Takeshita K, Tsujino S. Diagnosis of Japanese patients with HHH syndrome by
molecular genetic analysis: a common mutation, R179X. J Hum Genet.
2001;46(5):260-2. doi: 10.1007/s100380170075. Citation on PubMed Waisbren SE, Gropman AL; Members of the Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium
(UCDC); Batshaw ML. Improving long term outcomes in urea cycle disorders-report
from the Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2016
Jul;39(4):573-84. doi: 10.1007/s10545-016-9942-0. Epub 2016 May 23. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Brain Disorders Genetic Disorders Mitochondrial Diseases Newborn Screening MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Hereditary urea cycle abnormality Related Medical Tests Ammonia Levels Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2019