Gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/gnathodiaphyseal-dysplasia/ Gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia is a disorder that affects the bones. People with this condition have reduced bone mineral density (osteopenia), which causes the bones to be unusually fragile. As a result, affected individuals typically experience multiple bone fractures in childhood, often from mild trauma or with no apparent cause. While most bone tissue is less dense than normal in gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia, the outer layer (cortex) of the shafts of the long bones in the arms and legs is abnormally hard and thick (diaphyseal sclerosis). Bowing of the long bones also occurs in this disorder. Jaw problems are common in gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia; the prefix "gnatho-" in the condition name refers to the jaw. Affected individuals may develop bone infections (osteomyelitis) in the jaw, which can lead to pain, swelling, discharge of pus from the gums, loose teeth, and slow healing after teeth are lost or extracted. Areas of the jawbone may lose the protective coverage of the gums, which can result in deterioration of the exposed bone (osteonecrosis of the jaw). Also, normal bone in areas of the jaw may be replaced by fibrous tissue and a hard material called cementum, which normally surrounds the roots of teeth and anchors them in the jaw. These areas of abnormal bone, called cementoosseous lesions, may be present at birth or develop later in life. When gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia was first described, it was thought to be a variation of another bone disorder called osteogenesis imperfecta , which is also characterized by frequent bone fractures. However, gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia is now generally considered to be a separate condition. Unlike in osteogenesis imperfecta, the fractures in gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia heal normally without causing deformity or loss of height. Frequency The prevalence of gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia is unknown, but it is thought to be a rare disorder. A few affected individuals and families have been described in the medical literature. Causes Gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia is caused by mutations in the ANO5 gene, which provides instructions for making a protein called anoctamin-5. While the specific function of this protein is not well understood, it belongs to a family of proteins, called anoctamins, that act as chloride channels. Studies suggest that most anoctamin channels are turned on (activated) in the presence of positively charged calcium atoms (calcium ions); these channels are known as calcium-activated chloride channels. The mechanism for this calcium activation is unclear. The ANO5 gene mutations that have been identified in people with gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia change single protein building blocks (amino acids) in the anoctamin-5 protein. It is unclear how these protein changes lead to the fragile bones, jaw problems, and other skeletal abnormalities that occur in gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia. Researchers suggest that the mutations may affect the way cells process calcium, an important mineral in bone development and growth. Learn more about the gene associated with Gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia ANO5 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition GDD Gnathodiaphyseal sclerosis Levin syndrome 2 Osteogenesis imperfecta with unusual skeletal lesions Osteogenesis imperfecta, Levin type Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM GNATHODIAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA; GDD Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Ahluwalia J, Ly JQ, Norman E, Costello RF Jr, Beall DP. Gnathodiaphyseal
dysplasia. Clin Imaging. 2007 Jan-Feb;31(1):67-9. doi:
10.1016/j.clinimag.2006.07.003. Citation on PubMed Herman TE, Siegel MJ, Sargar K. Gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia. J Perinatol. 2014
May;34(5):412-4. doi: 10.1038/jp.2013.178. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Marconi C, Brunamonti Binello P, Badiali G, Caci E, Cusano R, Garibaldi J,
Pippucci T, Merlini A, Marchetti C, Rhoden KJ, Galietta LJ, Lalatta F, Balbi P,
Seri M. A novel missense mutation in ANO5/TMEM16E is causative for
gnathodiaphyseal dyplasia in a large Italian pedigree. Eur J Hum Genet. 2013
Jun;21(6):613-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.224. Epub 2012 Oct 10. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Riminucci M, Collins MT, Corsi A, Boyde A, Murphey MD, Wientroub S, Kuznetsov
SA, Cherman N, Robey PG, Bianco P. Gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia: a syndrome of
fibro-osseous lesions of jawbones, bone fragility, and long bone bowing. J Bone
Miner Res. 2001 Sep;16(9):1710-8. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.2001.16.9.1710. Citation on PubMed Tsutsumi S, Kamata N, Vokes TJ, Maruoka Y, Nakakuki K, Enomoto S, Omura K,
Amagasa T, Nagayama M, Saito-Ohara F, Inazawa J, Moritani M, Yamaoka T, Inoue H,
Itakura M. The novel gene encoding a putative transmembrane protein is mutated in
gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia (GDD). Am J Hum Genet. 2004 Jun;74(6):1255-61. doi:
10.1086/421527. Epub 2004 Apr 29. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Bone Density Bone Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Bone mineral density test Bowlegs Genetics Skeletal limb abnormalities Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 1, 2014