Bietti crystalline dystrophy: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Bietti crystalline dystrophy URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/bietti-crystalline-dystrophy/ Bietti crystalline dystrophy To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Bietti crystalline dystrophy is a disorder in which numerous small, yellow or white crystal-like deposits of fatty (lipid) compounds accumulate in the light-sensitive tissue that lines the back of the eye ( the retina ). The deposits damage the retina, resulting in progressive vision loss. People with Bietti crystalline dystrophy typically begin noticing vision problems in their teens or twenties. They experience a loss of sharp vision (reduction in visual acuity) and difficulty seeing in dim light (night blindness). They usually lose areas of vision (visual field loss), most often side (peripheral) vision. Color vision may also be impaired. The vision problems may worsen at different rates in each eye, and the severity and progression of symptoms varies widely among affected individuals, even within the same family. However, most people with this condition become legally blind by their forties or fifties. Most affected individuals retain some degree of vision, usually in the center of the visual field, although it is typically blurry and cannot be corrected by glasses or contact lenses. Vision impairment that cannot be improved with corrective lenses is called low vision. Frequency Bietti crystalline dystrophy has been estimated to occur in 1 in 67,000 people. It is more common in people of East Asian descent, especially those of Chinese and Japanese background. Researchers suggest that Bietti crystalline dystrophy may be underdiagnosed because its symptoms are similar to those of other eye disorders that progressively damage the retina. Causes Bietti crystalline dystrophy is caused by mutations in the CYP4V2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a member of the cytochrome P450 family of enzymes. These enzymes are involved in the formation and breakdown of various molecules and chemicals within cells. The CYP4V2 enzyme is involved in a multi-step process called fatty acid oxidation in which lipids are broken down and converted into energy, but the enzyme's specific function is not well understood. CYP4V2 gene mutations that cause Bietti crystalline dystrophy impair or eliminate the function of this enzyme and are believed to affect lipid breakdown. However, it is unknown how they lead to the specific signs and symptoms of Bietti crystalline dystrophy. For unknown reasons, the severity of the signs and symptoms differs significantly among individuals with the same CYP4V2 gene mutation. Learn more about the gene associated with Bietti crystalline dystrophy CYP4V2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition BCD Bietti crystalline corneoretinal dystrophy Bietti crystalline retinopathy Bietti tapetoretinal degeneration with marginal corneal dystrophy Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Bietti crystalline corneoretinal dystrophy Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Bietti crystalline dystrophy Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM BIETTI CRYSTALLINE CORNEORETINAL DYSTROPHY; BCD Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Li A, Jiao X, Munier FL, Schorderet DF, Yao W, Iwata F, Hayakawa M, Kanai A,
Shy Chen M, Alan Lewis R, Heckenlively J, Weleber RG, Traboulsi EI, Zhang Q, Xiao
X, Kaiser-Kupfer M, Sergeev YV, Hejtmancik JF. Bietti crystalline corneoretinal
dystrophy is caused by mutations in the novel gene CYP4V2. Am J Hum Genet. 2004
May;74(5):817-26. doi: 10.1086/383228. Epub 2004 Mar 23. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Mamatha G, Umashankar V, Kasinathan N, Krishnan T, Sathyabaarathi R,
Karthiyayini T, Amali J, Rao C, Madhavan J. Molecular screening of the CYP4V2
gene in Bietti crystalline dystrophy that is associated with choroidal
neovascularization. Mol Vis. 2011;17:1970-7. Epub 2011 Jul 20. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Mansour AM, Uwaydat SH, Chan CC. Long-term follow-up in Bietti crystalline
dystrophy. Eur J Ophthalmol. 2007 Jul-Aug;17(4):680-2. doi:
10.1177/112067210701700434. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Rossi S, Testa F, Li A, Iorio VD, Zhang J, Gesualdo C, Corte MD, Chan CC,
Fielding Hejtmancik J, Simonelli F. An atypical form of Bietti crystalline
dystrophy. Ophthalmic Genet. 2011 Jun;32(2):118-21. doi:
10.3109/13816810.2011.559653. Epub 2011 Mar 8. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Xiao X, Mai G, Li S, Guo X, Zhang Q. Identification of CYP4V2 mutation in 21
families and overview of mutation spectrum in Bietti crystalline corneoretinal
dystrophy. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jun 3;409(2):181-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.04.112. Epub 2011 May 1. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Retinal Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated November 1, 2012