3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/3-beta-hydroxysteroid-dehydrogenase-deficiency/ 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description 3-beta (β)-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (HSD) deficiency is an inherited disorder that affects hormone-producing glands including the gonads ( ovaries in females and testes in males ) and the adrenal glands . The gonads direct sexual development before birth and during puberty. The adrenal glands, which are located on top of the kidneys, regulate the production of certain hormones and control salt levels in the body. People with 3β-HSD deficiency lack many of the hormones that are made in these glands. 3β-HSD deficiency is one of a group of disorders known as congenital adrenal hyperplasias that impair hormone production and disrupt sexual development and maturation. There are three types of 3β-HSD deficiency: the salt-wasting, non-salt-wasting, and non-classic types. In the salt-wasting type, hormone production is extremely low. Individuals with this type lose large amounts of sodium in their urine, which can be life-threatening. Individuals affected with the salt-wasting type are usually diagnosed soon after birth due to complications related to a lack of salt reabsorption, including dehydration, poor feeding, and vomiting. People with the non-salt-wasting type of 3β-HSD deficiency produce enough hormone to allow sodium reabsorption in the kidneys. Individuals with the non-classic type have the mildest symptoms and do not experience salt wasting. In males with any type of 3β-HSD deficiency, problems with male sex hormones lead to abnormalities of the external genitalia. These abnormalities range from having the opening of the urethra on the underside of the penis (hypospadias) to having external genitalia that do not look clearly male or female. The severity of the genital abnormality does not consistently depend on the type of the condition. Because of the hormone dysfunction in the testes, males with 3β-HSD deficiency are frequently unable to have biological children (infertile). Females with 3β-HSD deficiency may have slight abnormalities of the external genitalia at birth. Females affected with the non-salt-wasting or non-classic types are typically not diagnosed until mid-childhood or puberty, when they may experience irregular menstruation, premature pubic hair growth, and excessive body hair growth (hirsutism). Females with 3β-HSD deficiency have difficulty conceiving a child (impaired fertility). Frequency The exact prevalence of 3β-HSD deficiency is unknown. At least 60 affected individuals have been reported. Causes Mutations in the HSD3B2 gene cause 3β-HSD deficiency. The HSD3B2 gene provides instructions for making the 3β-HSD enzyme. This enzyme is found in the gonads and adrenal glands . The 3β-HSD enzyme is involved in the production of many hormones, including cortisol , aldosterone , androgens, and estrogen. Cortisol has numerous functions such as maintaining energy and blood sugar (glucose) levels, protecting the body from stress, and suppressing inflammation. Aldosterone is sometimes called the salt-retaining hormone because it regulates the amount of salt retained by the kidney. The retention of salt affects fluid levels and blood pressure. Androgens and estrogen are essential for normal sexual development and reproduction. 3β-HSD deficiency is caused by a deficiency (shortage) of the 3β-HSD enzyme. The amount of functional 3β-HSD enzyme determines whether a person will have the salt-wasting or non-salt-wasting type of the disorder. Individuals with the salt-wasting type have HSD3B2 gene mutations that result in the production of very little or no enzyme. People with the non-salt-wasting type of this condition have HSD3B2 gene mutations that allow the production of some functional enzyme, although in reduced amounts. Learn more about the gene associated with 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency HSD3B2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition 3 beta-HSD deficiency 3 beta-ol dehydrogenase deficiency 3-beta–hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency 3b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency 3β-HSD deficiency 3β-HSD deficiency congenital adrenal hyperplasia 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency Type II 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: 3 beta-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA, CONGENITAL, DUE TO 3-BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE 2 DEFICIENCY Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Lutfallah C, Wang W, Mason JI, Chang YT, Haider A, Rich B, Castro-Magana M,
Copeland KC, David R, Pang S. Newly proposed hormonal criteria via genotypic
proof for type II 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Jun;87(6):2611-22. doi: 10.1210/jcem.87.6.8615. Citation on PubMed Pan Y, Zhong S, Hu RM, Gong W. Mutation of 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
(3beta-HSD) at the 3'-untranslated region is associated with adrenocortical
insufficiency. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Dec;6(6):1305-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.1107.
Epub 2012 Sep 28. Citation on PubMed Pang S, Carbunaru G, Haider A, Copeland KC, Chang YT, Lutfallah C, Mason JI.
Carriers for type II 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (HSD3B2) deficiency can
only be identified by HSD3B2 genotype study and not by hormone test. Clin
Endocrinol (Oxf). 2003 Mar;58(3):323-31. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2265.2003.01716.x. Citation on PubMed Pang S, Wang W, Rich B, David R, Chang YT, Carbunaru G, Myers SE, Howie AF,
Smillie KJ, Mason JI. A novel nonstop mutation in the stop codon and a novel
missense mutation in the type II 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3beta-HSD)
gene causing, respectively, nonclassic and classic 3beta-HSD deficiency
congenital adrenal hyperplasia. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Jun;87(6):2556-63.
doi: 10.1210/jcem.87.6.8559. Citation on PubMed Pang S. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia owing to 3 beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase deficiency. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2001 Mar;30(1):81-99,
vi-vii. doi: 10.1016/s0889-8529(08)70020-3. Citation on PubMed Simard J, Moisan AM, Morel Y. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to
3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/Delta(5)-Delta(4) isomerase deficiency. Semin
Reprod Med. 2002 Aug;20(3):255-76. doi: 10.1055/s-2002-35373. Citation on PubMed Takasawa K, Ono M, Hijikata A, Matsubara Y, Katsumata N, Takagi M, Morio T,
Ohara O, Kashimada K, Mizutani S. Two novel HSD3B2 missense mutations with
diverse residual enzymatic activities for Delta5-steroids. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf).
2014 Jun;80(6):782-9. doi: 10.1111/cen.12394. Epub 2014 Jan 16. Citation on PubMed Welzel M, Wustemann N, Simic-Schleicher G, Dorr HG, Schulze E, Shaikh G,
Clayton P, Grotzinger J, Holterhus PM, Riepe FG. Carboxyl-terminal mutations in
3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type II cause severe salt-wasting congenital
adrenal hyperplasia. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Apr;93(4):1418-25. doi:
10.1210/jc.2007-1874. Epub 2008 Feb 5. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Adrenal Gland Disorders Assisted Reproductive Technology Genetic Disorders Infertility MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Ambiguous genitalia Congenital adrenal hyperplasia Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated April 1, 2015