Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/dermatofibrosarcoma-protuberans/ Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans is a rare type of cancer that causes a tumor in the deep layers of skin. This condition is a type of soft tissue sarcoma , which are cancers that affect skin, fat, muscle, and similar tissues. In dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, the tumor most often starts as a small, firm patch of skin, usually 1 to 5 centimeters in diameter, that is usually purplish, reddish, or flesh-colored. The tumor typically grows slowly and can become a raised nodule. Occasionally, the tumor begins as a flat or depressed patch of skin (plaque). Tumors are most commonly found on the torso and can also be found on the arms, legs, head, or neck. Affected individuals usually first show signs of this condition in their thirties, but the age at which a tumor appears varies widely. In dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, the tumor has a tendency to return after being removed. However, it does not often spread to other parts of the body ( metastasize ). There are several variants of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans in which different cell types are involved in the tumor. Bednar tumors, often called pigmented dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, contain dark-colored (pigmented) cells called melanin-containing dendritic cells. Myxoid dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans tumors contain an abnormal type of connective tissue known as myxoid stroma. Giant cell fibroblastoma, which is sometimes referred to as juvenile dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans because it typically affects children and adolescents, is characterized by giant cells in the tumor. Rarely, the tumors involved in the different types of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans can have regions that look similar to fibrosarcoma, a more aggressive type of soft tissue sarcoma. In these cases, the condition is called fibrosarcomatous dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans or FS-DFSP. FS-DFSP tumors are more likely to metastasize than tumors in the other types of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. Frequency Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans is estimated to occur in 1 in 100,000 to 1 in 1 million people per year. Causes Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans is associated with a rearrangement (translocation) of genetic material between chromosome 17 and chromosome 22 . This translocation, written as t(17;22), fuses part of the COL1A1 gene from chromosome 17 with part of the PDGFB gene from chromosome 22. The translocation is found on one or more extra chromosomes that can be either the normal linear shape or circular. When circular, the extra chromosomes are known as supernumerary ring chromosomes. Ring chromosomes occur when a chromosome breaks in two places and the ends of the chromosome arms fuse together to form a circular structure. Other genes from chromosomes 17 and 22 can be found on the extra chromosomes, but the role these genes play in development of the condition is unclear. The translocation is acquired during a person's lifetime and the chromosomes containing the translocation are present only in the tumor cells. This type of genetic change is called a somatic mutation. In normal cells, the COL1A1 gene provides instructions for making part of a large molecule called type I collagen, which strengthens and supports many tissues in the body. The PDGFB gene provides instructions for making one version (isoform) of the platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) protein. By attaching to its receptor, the active PDGFB protein stimulates many cellular processes, including cell growth and division (proliferation) and maturation (differentiation). The abnormally fused COL1A1-PDGFB gene provides instructions for making an abnormal combined (fusion) protein that researchers believe ultimately functions like the PDGFB protein. The gene fusion leads to the production of an excessive amount of protein that functions like the PDGFB protein. In excess, this fusion protein stimulates cells to proliferate and differentiate abnormally, leading to the tumor formation seen in dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. The COL1A1-PDGFB fusion gene is found in more than 90 percent of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans cases. In the remaining cases, changes in other genes may be associated with this condition. These genes have not been identified. Learn more about the genes and chromosomes associated with Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans COL1A1 PDGFB chromosome 17 chromosome 22 Inheritance Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans results from a new mutation that occurs in the body's cells after conception and is found only in the tumor cells. This type of genetic change is called a somatic mutation and is generally not inherited. Other Names for This Condition Darier-Ferrand tumor Darier-Hoffmann tumor Dermatofibrosarcoma DFSP Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM DERMATOFIBROSARCOMA PROTUBERANS; DFSP Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Greco A, Fusetti L, Villa R, Sozzi G, Minoletti F, Mauri P, Pierotti MA.
Transforming activity of the chimeric sequence formed by the fusion of collagen
gene COL1A1 and the platelet derived growth factor b-chain gene in
dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. Oncogene. 1998 Sep 10;17(10):1313-9. doi:
10.1038/sj.onc.1202051. Citation on PubMed Heldin CH, Ostman A, Ronnstrand L. Signal transduction via platelet-derived
growth factor receptors. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Aug 19;1378(1):F79-113. doi:
10.1016/s0304-419x(98)00015-8. Citation on PubMed Kampshoff JL, Cogbill TH. Unusual skin tumors: Merkel cell carcinoma, eccrine
carcinoma, glomus tumors, and dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. Surg Clin North
Am. 2009 Jun;89(3):727-38. doi: 10.1016/j.suc.2009.02.005. Citation on PubMed Mendenhall WM, Zlotecki RA, Scarborough MT. Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans.
Cancer. 2004 Dec 1;101(11):2503-8. doi: 10.1002/cncr.20678. Citation on PubMed Naeem R, Lux ML, Huang SF, Naber SP, Corson JM, Fletcher JA. Ring chromosomes
in dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans are composed of interspersed sequences from
chromosomes 17 and 22. Am J Pathol. 1995 Dec;147(6):1553-8. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Pedeutour F, Simon MP, Minoletti F, Sozzi G, Pierotti MA, Hecht F, Turc-Carel
C. Ring 22 chromosomes in dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans are low-level
amplifiers of chromosome 17 and 22 sequences. Cancer Res. 1995 Jun
1;55(11):2400-3. Citation on PubMed Sandberg AA, Bridge JA. Updates on the cytogenetics and molecular genetics of
bone and soft tissue tumors. Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans and giant cell
fibroblastoma. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2003 Jan 1;140(1):1-12. doi:
10.1016/s0165-4608(02)00848-8. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Shimizu A, O'Brien KP, Sjoblom T, Pietras K, Buchdunger E, Collins VP, Heldin
CH, Dumanski JP, Ostman A. The dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans-associated
collagen type Ialpha1/platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) B-chain fusion gene
generates a transforming protein that is processed to functional PDGF-BB. Cancer
Res. 1999 Aug 1;59(15):3719-23. Citation on PubMed Simon MP, Navarro M, Roux D, Pouyssegur J. Structural and functional analysis
of a chimeric protein COL1A1-PDGFB generated by the translocation
t(17;22)(q22;q13.1) in Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DP). Oncogene. 2001 May
24;20(23):2965-75. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1204426. Citation on PubMed Simon MP, Pedeutour F, Sirvent N, Grosgeorge J, Minoletti F, Coindre JM,
Terrier-Lacombe MJ, Mandahl N, Craver RD, Blin N, Sozzi G, Turc-Carel C, O'Brien
KP, Kedra D, Fransson I, Guilbaud C, Dumanski JP. Deregulation of the
platelet-derived growth factor B-chain gene via fusion with collagen gene COL1A1
in dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans and giant-cell fibroblastoma. Nat Genet. 1997
Jan;15(1):95-8. doi: 10.1038/ng0197-95. Citation on PubMed Sirvent N, Maire G, Pedeutour F. Genetics of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans
family of tumors: from ring chromosomes to tyrosine kinase inhibitor treatment.
Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2003 May;37(1):1-19. doi: 10.1002/gcc.10202. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Soft Tissue Sarcoma MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated September 1, 2011