Maple syrup urine disease: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Maple syrup urine disease URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/maple-syrup-urine-disease/ Maple syrup urine disease To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Maple syrup urine disease is an inherited disorder in which the body is unable to process certain protein building blocks (amino acids) properly. The condition gets its name from the distinctive sweet odor of affected infants' urine. It is also characterized by poor feeding, vomiting, lack of energy (lethargy), abnormal movements, and delayed development. If untreated, maple syrup urine disease can lead to seizures, coma, and death. Maple syrup urine disease is often classified by its pattern of signs and symptoms. The most common and severe form of the disease is the classic type, which becomes apparent soon after birth. Variant forms of the disorder become apparent later in infancy or childhood and are typically milder, but they still lead to delayed development and other health problems if not treated. Frequency Maple syrup urine disease affects an estimated 1 in 185,000 infants worldwide.  The disorder occurs much more frequently in the Old Order Mennonite population, with an estimated incidence of about 1 in 380 newborns. Causes Mutations in the BCKDHA , BCKDHB , and DBT genes can cause maple syrup urine disease. These three genes provide instructions for making proteins that work together as part of a complex. The protein complex is essential for breaking down the amino acids leucine, isoleucine, and valine, which are present in many kinds of food, particularly protein-rich foods such as milk, meat, and eggs. Mutations in any of these three genes reduce or eliminate the function of the protein complex, preventing the normal breakdown of leucine, isoleucine, and valine. As a result, these amino acids and their byproducts build up in the body. Because high levels of these substances are toxic to the brain and other organs, their accumulation leads to the serious health problems associated with maple syrup urine disease. Researchers are studying other genes related to the same protein complex that may also be associated with maple syrup urine disease. Learn more about the genes associated with Maple syrup urine disease BCKDHA BCKDHB DBT Additional Information from NCBI Gene: PPM1K Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition BCKD deficiency Branched-chain alpha-keto acid dehydrogenase deficiency Branched-chain ketoaciduria Ketoacidemia MSUD Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Classical maple syrup urine disease Genetic Testing Registry: Maple syrup urine disease Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Maple syrup urine disease Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MAPLE SYRUP URINE DISEASE, TYPE IA; MSUD1A MAPLE SYRUP URINE DISEASE, MILD VARIANT; MSUDMV Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Burrage LC, Nagamani SC, Campeau PM, Lee BH. Branched-chain amino acid
metabolism: from rare Mendelian diseases to more common disorders. Hum Mol Genet.
2014 Sep 15;23(R1):R1-8. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu123. Epub 2014 Mar 20. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Carleton SM, Peck DS, Grasela J, Dietiker KL, Phillips CL. DNA carrier testing
and newborn screening for maple syrup urine disease in Old Order Mennonite
communities. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2010 Apr;14(2):205-8. doi:
10.1089/gtmb.2009.0107. Citation on PubMed Harris-Haman P, Brown L, Massey S, Ramamoorthy S. Implications of Maple Syrup
Urine Disease in Newborns. Nurs Womens Health. 2017 Jun-Jul;21(3):196-206. doi:
10.1016/j.nwh.2017.04.009. Citation on PubMed Oyarzabal A, Martinez-Pardo M, Merinero B, Navarrete R, Desviat LR, Ugarte M,
Rodriguez-Pombo P. A novel regulatory defect in the branched-chain alpha-keto acid
dehydrogenase complex due to a mutation in the PPM1K gene causes a mild variant
phenotype of maple syrup urine disease. Hum Mutat. 2013 Feb;34(2):355-62. doi:
10.1002/humu.22242. Epub 2012 Dec 12. Citation on PubMed Simon E, Flaschker N, Schadewaldt P, Langenbeck U, Wendel U. Variant maple
syrup urine disease (MSUD)--the entire spectrum. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2006
Dec;29(6):716-24. doi: 10.1007/s10545-006-0276-1. Epub 2006 Oct 25. Citation on PubMed Strauss KA, Puffenberger EG, Carson VJ. Maple Syrup Urine Disease. 2006 Jan 30
[updated 2020 Apr 23]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE,
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University
of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1319/ Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Amino Acid Metabolism Disorders Genetic Brain Disorders Genetic Disorders Newborn Screening MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Maple syrup urine disease Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated July 1, 2017