Primary sclerosing cholangitis: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Primary sclerosing cholangitis URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/primary-sclerosing-cholangitis/ Primary sclerosing cholangitis To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Primary sclerosing cholangitis is a condition that affects the bile ducts. These ducts carry bile (a fluid that helps to digest fats) from the liver, where bile is produced, to the gallbladder , where it is stored, and to the small intestine , where it aids in digestion. Primary sclerosing cholangitis occurs because of inflammation in the bile ducts (cholangitis) that leads to scarring (sclerosis) and narrowing of the ducts. As a result, bile cannot be released to the gallbladder and small intestine, and it builds up in the liver . Primary sclerosing cholangitis is usually diagnosed around age 40, and for unknown reasons, it affects men twice as often as women. Many people have no signs or symptoms of the condition when they are diagnosed, but routine blood tests reveal liver problems. When apparent, the earliest signs and symptoms of primary sclerosing cholangitis include extreme tiredness (fatigue), discomfort in the abdomen, and severe itchiness (pruritus). As the condition worsens, affected individuals may develop yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice) and an enlarged spleen (splenomegaly). Eventually, the buildup of bile damages the liver cells, causing chronic liver disease (cirrhosis) and liver failure. Without bile available to digest them, fats pass through the body. As a result, weight loss and shortages of vitamins that are absorbed with and stored in fats (fat-soluble vitamins) can occur. A fat-soluble vitamin called vitamin D helps absorb calcium and helps bones harden, and lack of this vitamin can cause thinning of the bones ( osteoporosis ) in people with primary sclerosing cholangitis. Primary sclerosing cholangitis is often associated with another condition called inflammatory bowel disease, which is characterized by inflammation of the intestines that causes open sores (ulcers) in the intestines and abdominal pain. However, the reason for this link is unclear. Approximately 70 percent of people with primary sclerosing cholangitis have inflammatory bowel disease, most commonly a form of the condition known as ulcerative colitis . In addition, people with primary sclerosing cholangitis are more likely to have an autoimmune disorder, such as type 1 diabetes , celiac disease , or thyroid disease, than people without the condition. Autoimmune disorders occur when the immune system malfunctions and attacks the body's tissues and organs. People with primary sclerosing cholangitis also have an increased risk of developing cancer, particularly cancer of the bile ducts ( cholangiocarcinoma ). Frequency An estimated 1 in 10,000 people have primary sclerosing cholangitis, and the condition is diagnosed in approximately 1 in 100,000 people per year worldwide. Causes Primary sclerosing cholangitis is thought to arise from a combination of genetic and environmental factors. Researchers believe that genetic changes play a role in this condition because it often occurs in several members of a family and because immediate family members of someone with primary sclerosing cholangitis have an increased risk of developing the condition. It is likely that specific genetic variations increase a person's risk of developing primary sclerosing cholangitis, and then exposure to certain environmental factors triggers the disorder. However, the genetic changes that increase susceptibility and the environmental triggers remain unclear. There is evidence that variations in certain genes involved in immune function influence the risk of developing primary sclerosing cholangitis. The most commonly associated genes belong to a family of genes called the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) complex . The HLA complex helps the immune system distinguish the body's own proteins from proteins made by foreign invaders (such as viruses and bacteria). Each HLA gene has many different normal variations, allowing each person's immune system to react to a wide range of foreign proteins. Specific variations of several HLA genes seem to be present more often in people with primary sclerosing cholangitis than in people who do not have the disorder. These variations may dysregulate the body's immune response, leading to the inflammation of the bile ducts in people with primary sclerosing cholangitis. However, the mechanism is not well understood. Researchers are also studying variations in other genes related to the body's immune function to understand how they contribute to the risk of developing this condition. Inheritance The inheritance pattern of primary sclerosing cholangitis is unknown because many genetic and environmental factors are likely to be involved. This condition tends to cluster in families, however, and having an affected family member is a risk factor for developing the disease. Other Names for This Condition PSC Sclerosing cholangitis Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Primary sclerosing cholangitis Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Primary sclerosing cholangitis Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CHOLANGITIS, PRIMARY SCLEROSING; PSC Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bergquist A, Lindberg G, Saarinen S, Broome U. Increased prevalence of primary
sclerosing cholangitis among first-degree relatives. J Hepatol. 2005
Feb;42(2):252-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2004.10.011. Citation on PubMed Friedrich K, Rupp C, Hov JR, Steinebrunner N, Weiss KH, Stiehl A, Brune M,
Schaefer PK, Schemmer P, Sauer P, Schirmacher P, Runz H, Karlsen TH, Stremmel W,
Gotthardt DN. A frequent PNPLA3 variant is a sex specific disease modifier in PSC
patients with bile duct stenosis. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58734. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0058734. Epub 2013 Mar 7. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Karlsen TH, Franke A, Melum E, Kaser A, Hov JR, Balschun T, Lie BA, Bergquist
A, Schramm C, Weismuller TJ, Gotthardt D, Rust C, Philipp EE, Fritz T, Henckaerts
L, Weersma RK, Stokkers P, Ponsioen CY, Wijmenga C, Sterneck M, Nothnagel M,
Hampe J, Teufel A, Runz H, Rosenstiel P, Stiehl A, Vermeire S, Beuers U, Manns
MP, Schrumpf E, Boberg KM, Schreiber S. Genome-wide association analysis in
primary sclerosing cholangitis. Gastroenterology. 2010 Mar;138(3):1102-11. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2009.11.046. Epub 2009 Nov 26. Citation on PubMed Melum E, Franke A, Schramm C, Weismuller TJ, Gotthardt DN, Offner FA, Juran
BD, Laerdahl JK, Labi V, Bjornsson E, Weersma RK, Henckaerts L, Teufel A, Rust C,
Ellinghaus E, Balschun T, Boberg KM, Ellinghaus D, Bergquist A, Sauer P, Ryu E,
Hov JR, Wedemeyer J, Lindkvist B, Wittig M, Porte RJ, Holm K, Gieger C, Wichmann
HE, Stokkers P, Ponsioen CY, Runz H, Stiehl A, Wijmenga C, Sterneck M, Vermeire
S, Beuers U, Villunger A, Schrumpf E, Lazaridis KN, Manns MP, Schreiber S,
Karlsen TH. Genome-wide association analysis in primary sclerosing cholangitis
identifies two non-HLA susceptibility loci. Nat Genet. 2011 Jan;43(1):17-9. doi:
10.1038/ng.728. Epub 2010 Dec 12. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Mendes F, Lindor KD. Primary sclerosing cholangitis: overview and update. Nat
Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Nov;7(11):611-9. doi: 10.1038/nrgastro.2010.155.
Epub 2010 Oct 12. Citation on PubMed Neri TM, Cavestro GM, Seghini P, Zanelli PF, Zanetti A, Savi M, Podda M, Zuin
M, Colombo M, Floreani A, Rosina F, Bianchi Porro G, Strazzabosco M, Okolicsanyi
L. Novel association of HLA-haplotypes with primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC)
in a southern European population. Dig Liver Dis. 2003 Aug;35(8):571-6. doi:
10.1016/s1590-8658(03)00274-3. Citation on PubMed Spurkland A, Saarinen S, Boberg KM, Mitchell S, Broome U, Caballeria L,
Ciusani E, Chapman R, Ercilla G, Fausa O, Knutsen I, Pares A, Rosina F, Olerup O,
Thorsby E, Schrumpf E. HLA class II haplotypes in primary sclerosing cholangitis
patients from five European populations. Tissue Antigens. 1999 May;53(5):459-69.
doi: 10.1034/j.1399-0039.1999.530502.x. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Bile Duct Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Bile Pathway (Image) Genetics Sclerosing cholangitis Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated May 1, 2012