Hyperphosphatemic familial tumoral calcinosis: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Hyperphosphatemic familial tumoral calcinosis URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/hyperphosphatemic-familial-tumoral-calcinosis/ Hyperphosphatemic familial tumoral calcinosis To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Hyperphosphatemic familial tumoral calcinosis (HFTC) is a condition characterized by an increase in the levels of phosphate in the blood (hyperphosphatemia) and abnormal deposits of phosphate and calcium (calcinosis) in the body's tissues. Calcinosis typically develops in early childhood to early adulthood, although in some people the deposits first appear in infancy or in late adulthood. Calcinosis usually occurs in and just under skin tissue around the joints, most often the hips, shoulders, and elbows. Calcinosis may also develop in the soft tissue of the feet, legs, and hands. Rarely, calcinosis occurs in blood vessels or in the brain and can cause serious health problems. The deposits develop over time and vary in size. Larger deposits form masses that are noticeable under the skin and can interfere with the function of joints and impair movement. These large deposits may appear tumor-like (tumoral), but they are not tumors or cancerous. The number and frequency of deposits varies among affected individuals; some develop few deposits during their lifetime, while others may develop many in a short period of time. Other features of HFTC include eye abnormalities such as calcium buildup in the clear front covering of the eye (corneal calcification) or angioid streaks that occur when tiny breaks form in the layer of tissue at the back of the eye called Bruch's membrane. Inflammation of the long bones ( diaphysis ) or excessive bone growth (hyperostosis) may occur. Some affected individuals have dental abnormalities. In males, small crystals of cholesterol can accumulate (microlithiasis) in the testicles, which usually causes no health problems. A similar condition called hyperphosphatemia-hyperostosis syndrome (HHS) results in increased levels of phosphate in the blood, excessive bone growth, and bone lesions. This condition used to be considered a separate disorder, but it is now thought to be a mild variant of HFTC. Frequency The prevalence of HFTC is unknown, but it is thought to be a rare condition. It occurs most often in Middle Eastern and African populations. Causes Mutations in the FGF23 , GALNT3 , or KL gene cause HFTC. The proteins produced from these genes are all involved in the regulation of phosphate levels within the body (phosphate homeostasis). Among its many functions, phosphate plays a critical role in the formation and growth of bones in childhood and helps maintain bone strength in adults. Phosphate levels are controlled in large part by the kidneys . The kidneys normally rid the body of excess phosphate by excreting it in urine, and they reabsorb this mineral into the bloodstream when more is needed. The FGF23 gene provides instructions for making a protein called fibroblast growth factor 23, which is produced in bone cells and signals the kidneys to stop reabsorbing phosphate. The proteins produced from the GALNT3 and KL genes help to regulate fibroblast growth factor 23. The protein produced from the GALNT3 gene, called ppGalNacT3, attaches sugar molecules to fibroblast growth factor 23 in a process called glycosylation. Glycosylation allows fibroblast growth factor 23 to move out of the cell and protects the protein from being broken down. Once outside the bone cell, fibroblast growth factor 23 must attach (bind) to a receptor protein that spans the membrane of kidney cells. The protein produced from the KL gene, called alpha-klotho, turns on (activates) the receptor protein so that fibroblast growth factor 23 can bind to it. Binding of fibroblast growth factor 23 to its receptor stimulates signaling that stops phosphate reabsorption into the bloodstream. Mutations in the FGF23 , GALNT3 , or KL gene lead to a disruption in fibroblast growth factor 23 signaling. FGF23 gene mutations result in the production of a protein with decreased function that quickly gets broken down.  Mutations in the GALNT3 gene result in the production of ppGalNacT3 protein with little or no function. As a result, the protein cannot glycosylate fibroblast growth factor 23, which is consequently trapped inside the cell and broken down rather than being released from the cell (secreted). KL gene mutations lead to a shortage of functional alpha-klotho. As a result, the receptor protein is not activated, causing it to be unavailable to be bound to fibroblast growth factor 23. All of these impairments to fibroblast growth factor 23 function and signaling lead to increased phosphate absorption by the kidneys. Calcinosis results when the excess phosphate combines with calcium to form deposits that build up in soft tissues. Although phosphate levels are increased, calcium is typically within the normal range. Learn more about the genes associated with Hyperphosphatemic familial tumoral calcinosis FGF23 GALNT3 KL Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition HFTC Hyperphosphatemia hyperostosis Hyperphosphatemia hyperostosis syndrome Hyperphosphatemia tumoral calcinosis Primary hyperphosphatemic tumoral calcinosis Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Tumoral calcinosis, hyperphosphatemic, familial, 1 Genetic Testing Registry: Tumoral calcinosis, hyperphosphatemic, familial, 3 Genetic Testing Registry: TUMORAL CALCINOSIS, HYPERPHOSPHATEMIC, FAMILIAL, 2 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Familial hyperphosphatemic tumoral calcinosis/Hyperphosphatemic hyperostosis syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM TUMORAL CALCINOSIS, HYPERPHOSPHATEMIC, FAMILIAL, 1; HFTC1 TUMORAL CALCINOSIS, HYPERPHOSPHATEMIC, FAMILIAL, 2; HFTC2 TUMORAL CALCINOSIS, HYPERPHOSPHATEMIC, FAMILIAL, 3; HFTC3 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Carmichael KD, Bynum JA, Evans EB. Familial tumoral calcinosis: a forty-year
follow-up on one family. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2009 Mar 1;91(3):664-71. doi:
10.2106/JBJS.G.01512. Citation on PubMed Chefetz I, Sprecher E. Familial tumoral calcinosis and the role of
O-glycosylation in the maintenance of phosphate homeostasis. Biochim Biophys
Acta. 2009 Sep;1792(9):847-52. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2008.10.008. Epub 2008 Oct
25. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Farrow EG, Imel EA, White KE. Miscellaneous non-inflammatory musculoskeletal
conditions. Hyperphosphatemic familial tumoral calcinosis (FGF23, GALNT3 and
alphaKlotho). Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2011 Oct;25(5):735-47. doi:
10.1016/j.berh.2011.10.020. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Ichikawa S, Baujat G, Seyahi A, Garoufali AG, Imel EA, Padgett LR, Austin AM,
Sorenson AH, Pejin Z, Topouchian V, Quartier P, Cormier-Daire V, Dechaux M,
Malandrinou FCh, Singhellakis PN, Le Merrer M, Econs MJ. Clinical variability of
familial tumoral calcinosis caused by novel GALNT3 mutations. Am J Med Genet A.
2010 Apr;152A(4):896-903. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33337. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Sprecher E. Familial tumoral calcinosis: from characterization of a rare
phenotype to the pathogenesis of ectopic calcification. J Invest Dermatol. 2010
Mar;130(3):652-60. doi: 10.1038/jid.2009.337. Epub 2009 Oct 29. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Yancovitch A, Hershkovitz D, Indelman M, Galloway P, Whiteford M, Sprecher E,
Kilic E. Novel mutations in GALNT3 causing hyperphosphatemic familial tumoral
calcinosis. J Bone Miner Metab. 2011 Sep;29(5):621-5. doi:
10.1007/s00774-011-0260-1. Epub 2011 Feb 25. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Kidney Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Calcium and bones Genetics Phosphorus blood test Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2012