Paramyotonia congenita: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Paramyotonia congenita URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/paramyotonia-congenita/ Paramyotonia congenita To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Paramyotonia congenita is a disorder that affects muscles used for movement (skeletal muscles). Beginning in infancy or early childhood, people with this condition experience bouts of sustained muscle tensing (myotonia) that prevent muscles from relaxing normally. Myotonia causes muscle stiffness that typically appears after exercise and can be induced by muscle cooling. This stiffness chiefly affects muscles in the face, neck, arms, and hands, although it can also affect muscles used for breathing and muscles in the lower body. Unlike many other forms of myotonia, the muscle stiffness associated with paramyotonia congenita tends to worsen with repeated movements. Most people—even those without muscle disease—feel that their muscles do not work as well when they are cold. This effect is dramatic in people with paramyotonia congenita. Exposure to cold initially causes muscle stiffness in these individuals, and prolonged cold exposure leads to temporary episodes of mild to severe muscle weakness that may last for several hours at a time. Some older people with paramyotonia congenita develop permanent muscle weakness that can be disabling. Frequency Paramyotonia congenita is an uncommon disorder; it is estimated to affect fewer than 1 in 100,000 people. Causes Mutations in the SCN4A gene cause paramyotonia congenita. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is critical for the normal function of skeletal muscle cells. For the body to move normally, skeletal muscles must tense (contract) and relax in a coordinated way. Muscle contractions are triggered by the flow of positively charged atoms (ions), including sodium, into skeletal muscle cells. The SCN4A protein forms channels that control the flow of sodium ions into these cells. Mutations in the SCN4A gene alter the usual structure and function of sodium channels. The altered channels cannot effectively regulate the flow of sodium ions into skeletal muscle cells. The resulting increase in ion flow interferes with normal muscle contraction and relaxation, leading to episodes of muscle stiffness and weakness. Learn more about the gene associated with Paramyotonia congenita SCN4A Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In many cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition. Other Names for This Condition Eulenburg disease Paralysis periodica paramyotonia Paramyotonia congenita of von Eulenburg PMC Von Eulenberg's disease Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Paramyotonia congenita of von Eulenburg Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Paramyotonia congenita of Von Eulenburg Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PARAMYOTONIA CONGENITA; PMC Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Cavel-Greant D, Lehmann-Horn F, Jurkat-Rott K. The impact of permanent muscle
weakness on quality of life in periodic paralysis: a survey of 66 patients. Acta
Myol. 2012 Oct;31(2):126-33. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Finsterer J. Primary periodic paralyses. Acta Neurol Scand. 2008
Mar;117(3):145-58. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2007.00963.x. Epub 2007 Nov 20. Citation on PubMed Magot A, David A, Sternberg D, Pereon Y. Focal and abnormally persistent
paralysis associated with congenital paramyotonia. BMJ Case Rep. 2014 Jun
17;2014:bcr2014204430. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2014-204430. Citation on PubMed Miller TM, Dias da Silva MR, Miller HA, Kwiecinski H, Mendell JR, Tawil R,
McManis P, Griggs RC, Angelini C, Servidei S, Petajan J, Dalakas MC, Ranum LP, Fu
YH, Ptacek LJ. Correlating phenotype and genotype in the periodic paralyses.
Neurology. 2004 Nov 9;63(9):1647-55. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000143383.91137.00. Citation on PubMed Miller TM. Differential diagnosis of myotonic disorders. Muscle Nerve. 2008
Mar;37(3):293-9. doi: 10.1002/mus.20923. Citation on PubMed Tamaoka A. Paramyotonia congenita and skeletal sodium channelopathy. Intern
Med. 2003 Sep;42(9):769-70. doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.42.769. No abstract
available. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Muscle Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2015