Hepatic lipase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Hepatic lipase deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/hepatic-lipase-deficiency/ Hepatic lipase deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Hepatic lipase deficiency is a disorder that affects the body's ability to break down fats (lipids). People with this disorder have increased amounts of certain fats, known as triglycerides and cholesterol, in the blood. These individuals also have increased amounts of molecules known as high-density lipoproteins (HDLs) and decreased amounts of molecules called low-density lipoproteins (LDL). These molecules transport triglycerides and cholesterol throughout the body. In people with hepatic lipase deficiency, the LDL molecules are often abnormally large. Normally, high levels of HDL (known as "good cholesterol") and low levels of LDL (known as "bad cholesterol") are protective against an accumulation of fatty deposits on the artery walls (atherosclerosis) and heart disease. However, some individuals with hepatic lipase deficiency, who have this imbalance of HDL and LDL, develop atherosclerosis and heart disease in mid-adulthood, while others do not. It is unknown whether people with hepatic lipase deficiency have a greater risk of developing atherosclerosis or heart disease than individuals in the general population. Similarly, it is unclear how increased blood triglycerides and cholesterol levels affect the risk of atherosclerosis and heart disease in people with hepatic lipase deficiency. Frequency Hepatic lipase deficiency is likely a rare disorder; only a few affected families have been reported in the scientific literature. Causes Hepatic lipase deficiency is caused by mutations in the LIPC gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called hepatic lipase. This enzyme is produced by liver cells and released into the bloodstream where it helps convert very low-density lipoproteins (VLDLs) and intermediate-density lipoproteins (IDLs) to LDLs . The enzyme also assists in transporting HDLs that carry cholesterol and triglycerides from the blood to the liver, where the HDLs deposit these fats so they can be redistributed to other tissues or removed from the body. LIPC gene mutations prevent the release of hepatic lipase from the liver or decrease the enzyme's activity in the bloodstream. As a result, VLDLs and IDLs are not efficiently converted into LDLs, and HDLs carrying cholesterol and triglycerides remain in the bloodstream. It is unclear what effect this change in lipid levels has on people with hepatic lipase deficiency. Learn more about the gene associated with Hepatic lipase deficiency LIPC Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition HL deficiency Hyperlipidemia due to hepatic triglyceride lipase deficiency LIPC deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Hyperlipidemia due to hepatic triglyceride lipase deficiency Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Hyperlipidemia due to hepatic triacylglycerol lipase deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM HEPATIC LIPASE DEFICIENCY Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Chatterjee C, Sparks DL. Hepatic lipase, high density lipoproteins, and
hypertriglyceridemia. Am J Pathol. 2011 Apr;178(4):1429-33. doi:
10.1016/j.ajpath.2010.12.050. Epub 2011 Feb 26. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Kobayashi J, Miyashita K, Nakajima K, Mabuchi H. Hepatic Lipase: a
Comprehensive View of its Role on Plasma Lipid and Lipoprotein Metabolism. J
Atheroscler Thromb. 2015;22(10):1001-11. doi: 10.5551/jat.31617. Epub 2015 Jul
21. Citation on PubMed Tilly-Kiesi M, Schaefer EJ, Knudsen P, Welty FK, Dolnikowski GG, Taskinen MR,
Lichtenstein AH. Lipoprotein metabolism in subjects with hepatic lipase
deficiency. Metabolism. 2004 Apr;53(4):520-5. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2003.10.020. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Cholesterol Genetic Disorders Triglycerides VLDL Cholesterol MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Cholesterol testing and results Genetics Triglyceride level Related Medical Tests Cholesterol Levels Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 1, 2015