Meige disease: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Meige disease URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/meige-disease/ Meige disease To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Meige disease is a condition that affects the normal function of the lymphatic system . The lymphatic system consists of a network of vessels that transport lymphatic fluid and immune cells throughout the body. Meige disease is characterized by the abnormal transport of lymphatic fluid. When this fluid builds up abnormally, it causes swelling (lymphedema) in the lower limbs. Meige disease is classified as a primary lymphedema, which means it is a form of lymphedema that is not caused by other health conditions. In Meige disease, the lymphatic system abnormalities are present from birth (congenital), although the swelling is not usually apparent until puberty. The swelling often begins in the feet and ankles and progresses up the legs to the knees. Some affected individuals develop non-contagious skin infections called cellulitis or erysipelas in the legs, which can further damage the vessels that carry lymphatic fluid. Frequency The prevalence of Meige disease is unknown. Collectively, the many types of primary lymphedema affect an estimated 1 in 100,000 people younger than 20; Meige disease is the most common type of primary lymphedema. For unknown reasons, this condition affects females about three times as often as males. Causes The cause of Meige disease is unknown. The condition is thought to be genetic because it tends to run in families, and other forms of primary lymphedema have been found to have a genetic cause. Researchers have studied many genes associated with the lymphatic system; however, no genetic change has been definitively found to cause the signs and symptoms of Meige disease. Inheritance Meige disease appears to have an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. Autosomal dominant inheritance means one copy of an altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder, although no genes have been associated with Meige disease. People with Meige disease usually have at least one other affected family member. In most cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition . When the condition occurs in only one person in a family , the condition is described as Meige-like disease. Other Names for This Condition Hereditary lymphedema II Late-onset lymphedema LMPH2 Lymphedema praecox Meige lymphedema Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Lymphedema praecox Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Meige disease Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM LYMPHATIC MALFORMATION 5; LMPHM5 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Connell FC, Gordon K, Brice G, Keeley V, Jeffery S, Mortimer PS, Mansour S,
Ostergaard P. The classification and diagnostic algorithm for primary lymphatic
dysplasia: an update from 2010 to include molecular findings. Clin Genet. 2013
Oct;84(4):303-14. doi: 10.1111/cge.12173. Epub 2013 Jun 27. Citation on PubMed Rezaie T, Ghoroghchian R, Bell R, Brice G, Hasan A, Burnand K, Vernon S,
Mansour S, Mortimer P, Jeffery S, Child A, Sarfarazi M. Primary non-syndromic
lymphoedema (Meige disease) is not caused by mutations in FOXC2. Eur J Hum Genet.
2008 Mar;16(3):300-4. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201982. Epub 2008 Jan 16. Citation on PubMed Shinawi M. Lymphedema of the lower extremity: is it genetic or nongenetic?
Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2007 Nov;46(9):835-41. doi: 10.1177/0009922807303545. Epub
2007 Jul 19. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Lymphedema MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated July 1, 2015