Fraser syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Fraser syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/fraser-syndrome/ Fraser syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Fraser syndrome is a rare disorder that affects development starting before birth. Characteristic features of this condition include eyes that are completely covered by skin and usually malformed (cryptophthalmos), fusion of the skin between the fingers and toes (cutaneous syndactyly), and abnormalities of the genitalia and the urinary tract (genitourinary anomalies). Other tissues and organs can also be affected. Depending on the severity of the signs and symptoms, Fraser syndrome can be fatal before or shortly after birth; less severely affected individuals can live into childhood or adulthood. Cryptophthalmos is the most common abnormality in people with Fraser syndrome. Both eyes are usually completely covered by skin, but in some cases, only one eye is covered or one or both eyes are partially covered. In cryptophthalmos, the eyes can also be malformed; for example, the eyeballs may be fused to the skin covering them, or they may be small ( microphthalmia ) or missing (anophthalmia). Eye abnormalities typically lead to impairment or loss of vision in people with Fraser syndrome. Affected individuals can have other problems related to abnormal eye development, including missing eyebrows or eyelashes or a patch of hair extending from the side hairline to the eyebrow. Cutaneous syndactyly typically occurs in both the hands and the feet in Fraser syndrome. In most people with this feature, the skin between the middle three fingers and toes are fused, but the other digits can also be involved. Other abnormalities of the hands and feet can occur in people with Fraser syndrome. Individuals with Fraser syndrome can have abnormalities of the genitalia, such as an enlarged clitoris in females or undescended testes (cryptorchidism) in males.  Some affected individuals have external genitalia that do not appear clearly female or male. The most common urinary tract abnormality in Fraser syndrome is the absence of one or both kidneys (renal agenesis). Affected individuals can have other kidney problems or abnormalities of the bladder and other parts of the urinary tract. A variety of other signs and symptoms can be involved in Fraser syndrome, including heart malformations or abnormalities of the voicebox (larynx) or other parts of the respiratory tract. Some affected individuals have facial abnormalities, including ear or nose abnormalities or an opening in the upper lip ( cleft lip ) with or without an opening in the roof of the mouth ( cleft palate ). Frequency Fraser syndrome affects an estimated 1 in 200,000 newborns. The condition occurs in approximately 1 in 10,000 fetuses that do not survive to birth. Causes Mutations in the FRAS1 , FREM2 , or GRIP1 gene can cause Fraser syndrome. FRAS1 gene mutations are the most common cause, accounting for about half of cases of Fraser syndrome. FREM2 and GRIP1 gene mutations are each found in a small percentage of cases. The FRAS1 and FREM2 proteins (produced from the FRAS1 and FREM2 genes, respectively) are part of a group of proteins called the FRAS/FREM complex. The GRIP1 protein (produced from the GRIP1 gene) ensures that FRAS1 and FREM2 get to the correct location of the cell to form the FRAS/FREM complex. The FRAS/FREM complex is found in basement membranes, which are thin, sheet-like structures that separate and support cells in many tissues. This complex is particularly important during development before birth. One of the complex's roles is to anchor the top layer of skin by connecting its basement membrane to the layer of skin below. The FRAS/FREM complex is also involved in the proper development of other organs and tissues, including the kidneys, although the mechanism is unclear. Mutations in any of these genes prevent formation of the FRAS/FREM complex. Lack of this complex in the basement membrane of the skin leads to detachment of the top layer of skin, causing blisters to form during development. These blisters likely impair the proper formation of certain structures before birth, leading to cryptophthalmos and cutaneous syndactyly. It is unknown how lack of the FRAS/FREM complex leads to kidney and genital abnormalities and other problems in Fraser syndrome. Learn more about the genes associated with Fraser syndrome FRAS1 FREM2 GRIP1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Cryptophthalmos syndactyly syndrome Cryptophthalmos syndrome Cryptophthalmos with other malformations Fraser's syndrome Fraser-Francois syndrome Meyer-Schwickerath syndrome Ullrich-Feichtiger syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Fraser syndrome 1 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Fraser syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM FRASER SYNDROME 1; FRASRS1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Barisic I, Odak L, Loane M, Garne E, Wellesley D, Calzolari E, Dolk H, Addor
MC, Arriola L, Bergman J, Bianca S, Boyd PA, Draper ES, Gatt M, Haeusler M,
Khoshnood B, Latos-Bielenska A, McDonnell B, Pierini A, Rankin J, Rissmann A,
Queisser-Luft A, Verellen-Dumoulin C, Stone D, Tenconi R. Fraser syndrome:
epidemiological study in a European population. Am J Med Genet A. 2013
May;161A(5):1012-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35839. Epub 2013 Mar 26. Citation on PubMed McGregor L, Makela V, Darling SM, Vrontou S, Chalepakis G, Roberts C, Smart N,
Rutland P, Prescott N, Hopkins J, Bentley E, Shaw A, Roberts E, Mueller R, Jadeja
S, Philip N, Nelson J, Francannet C, Perez-Aytes A, Megarbane A, Kerr B,
Wainwright B, Woolf AS, Winter RM, Scambler PJ. Fraser syndrome and mouse blebbed
phenotype caused by mutations in FRAS1/Fras1 encoding a putative extracellular
matrix protein. Nat Genet. 2003 Jun;34(2):203-8. doi: 10.1038/ng1142. Citation on PubMed Petrou P, Makrygiannis AK, Chalepakis G. The Fras1/Frem family of
extracellular matrix proteins: structure, function, and association with Fraser
syndrome and the mouse bleb phenotype. Connect Tissue Res. 2008;49(3):277-82.
doi: 10.1080/03008200802148025. Citation on PubMed Slavotinek AM, Tifft CJ. Fraser syndrome and cryptophthalmos: review of the
diagnostic criteria and evidence for phenotypic modules in complex malformation
syndromes. J Med Genet. 2002 Sep;39(9):623-33. doi: 10.1136/jmg.39.9.623. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central van Haelst MM, Maiburg M, Baujat G, Jadeja S, Monti E, Bland E, Pearce K;
Fraser Syndrome Collaboration Group; Hennekam RC, Scambler PJ. Molecular study of
33 families with Fraser syndrome new data and mutation review. Am J Med Genet A.
2008 Sep 1;146A(17):2252-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32440. Citation on PubMed van Haelst MM, Scambler PJ; Fraser Syndrome Collaboration Group; Hennekam RC.
Fraser syndrome: a clinical study of 59 cases and evaluation of diagnostic
criteria. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Dec 15;143A(24):3194-203. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.31951. Citation on PubMed Vogel MJ, van Zon P, Brueton L, Gijzen M, van Tuil MC, Cox P, Schanze D,
Kariminejad A, Ghaderi-Sohi S, Blair E, Zenker M, Scambler PJ, Ploos van Amstel
HK, van Haelst MM. Mutations in GRIP1 cause Fraser syndrome. J Med Genet. 2012
May;49(5):303-6. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2011-100590. Epub 2012 Apr 17. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Eye Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Webbing of the fingers or toes Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 1, 2014