Renal tubular dysgenesis: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Renal tubular dysgenesis URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/renal-tubular-dysgenesis/ Renal tubular dysgenesis To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Renal tubular dysgenesis is a severe kidney disorder characterized by abnormal development of the kidneys before birth. In particular, kidney structures called proximal tubules are absent or underdeveloped. These structures help to reabsorb needed nutrients, water, and other materials into the blood and excrete everything else into the urine. Without functional proximal tubules, the kidneys cannot produce urine (a condition called anuria). Fetal urine is the major component of the fluid that surrounds the fetus (amniotic fluid), and anuria leads to decreased amniotic fluid levels (oligohydramnios). Amniotic fluid helps cushion and protect the fetus and plays a role in the development of many organs, including the lungs. Oligohydramnios causes a set of abnormalities called the Potter sequence, which includes distinctive facial features such as a flattened nose and large, low-set ears; excess skin; inward- and upward-turning feet ( clubfeet ); and underdeveloped lungs. Renal tubular dysgenesis also causes severe low blood pressure (hypotension). In addition, bone development in the skull is abnormal in some affected individuals, causing a large space between the bones of the skull (fontanelles). As a result of the serious health problems caused by renal tubular dysgenesis, affected individuals usually die before birth, are stillborn, or die soon after birth from respiratory failure. Rarely, with treatment, affected individuals survive into childhood. Their blood pressure usually normalizes, but they quickly develop chronic kidney disease, which is characterized by reduced kidney function that worsens over time. Frequency Renal tubular dysgenesis is a rare disorder, but its prevalence is unknown. Causes Mutations in the ACE , AGT , AGTR1 , or REN gene can cause renal tubular dysgenesis. These genes are involved in the renin-angiotensin system, which regulates blood pressure and the balance of fluids and salts in the body and plays a role in kidney development before birth. The renin-angiotensin system consists of several proteins that are involved in a series of steps to produce a protein called angiotensin II. In the first step, the renin protein (produced from the REN gene) converts a protein called angiotensinogen (produced from the AGT gene) to angiotensin I. In the next step, angiotensin-converting enzyme (produced from the ACE gene) converts angiotensin I to angiotensin II. Angiotensin II attaches (binds) to the angiotensin II receptor type 1 (AT1 receptor; produced from the AGTR1 gene), stimulating chemical signaling. By binding to the AT1 receptor, angiotensin II causes blood vessels to narrow (constrict), which results in increased blood pressure. This protein also stimulates production of the hormone aldosterone, which triggers the absorption of salt and water by the kidneys. The increased amount of fluid in the body also increases blood pressure. Proper blood pressure, which delivers oxygen to the developing tissues during fetal growth, is required for normal development of the kidneys (particularly of the proximal tubules) and other tissues. Mutations in the ACE , AGT , AGTR1 , or REN gene impair the production or function of angiotensin II, leading to a nonfunctional renin-angiotensin system. Without this system, the kidneys cannot control blood pressure. Because of low blood pressure, the flow of blood is reduced (hypoperfusion), and the fetal tissues do not get enough oxygen during development. As a result, kidney development is impaired, leading to the features of renal tubular dysgenesis. Hypoperfusion also causes the skull abnormalities found in individuals with this condition. Medications that block the activity of the angiotensin-converting enzyme or the AT1 receptor are used to treat high blood pressure. Because these drugs impair the renin-angiotensin system, they can cause an acquired (non-inherited) form of renal tubular dysgenesis in fetuses of pregnant women who take them. Acquired renal tubular dysgenesis can also result from other conditions that cause renal hypoperfusion during fetal development. These include heart problems, congenital hemochromatosis, and a complication that can occur in twin pregnancies called twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. Learn more about the genes associated with Renal tubular dysgenesis ACE AGT AGTR1 REN Inheritance Renal tubular dysgenesis is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the affected gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Allanson Pantzar McLeod syndrome Primitive renal tubule syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Renal tubular dysgenesis Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Renal tubular dysgenesis Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM RENAL TUBULAR DYSGENESIS; RTD Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Gribouval O, Gonzales M, Neuhaus T, Aziza J, Bieth E, Laurent N, Bouton JM,
Feuillet F, Makni S, Ben Amar H, Laube G, Delezoide AL, Bouvier R, Dijoud F,
Ollagnon-Roman E, Roume J, Joubert M, Antignac C, Gubler MC. Mutations in genes
in the renin-angiotensin system are associated with autosomal recessive renal
tubular dysgenesis. Nat Genet. 2005 Sep;37(9):964-8. doi: 10.1038/ng1623. Epub
2005 Aug 14. Citation on PubMed Gribouval O, Moriniere V, Pawtowski A, Arrondel C, Sallinen SL, Saloranta C,
Clericuzio C, Viot G, Tantau J, Blesson S, Cloarec S, Machet MC, Chitayat D,
Thauvin C, Laurent N, Sampson JR, Bernstein JA, Clemenson A, Prieur F, Daniel L,
Levy-Mozziconacci A, Lachlan K, Alessandri JL, Cartault F, Riviere JP, Picard N,
Baumann C, Delezoide AL, Belar Ortega M, Chassaing N, Labrune P, Yu S, Firth H,
Wellesley D, Bitzan M, Alfares A, Braverman N, Krogh L, Tolmie J, Gaspar H, Doray
B, Majore S, Bonneau D, Triau S, Loirat C, David A, Bartholdi D, Peleg A,
Brackman D, Stone R, DeBerardinis R, Corvol P, Michaud A, Antignac C, Gubler MC.
Spectrum of mutations in the renin-angiotensin system genes in autosomal
recessive renal tubular dysgenesis. Hum Mutat. 2012 Feb;33(2):316-26. doi:
10.1002/humu.21661. Epub 2011 Dec 22. Citation on PubMed Gubler MC, Antignac C. Renin-angiotensin system in kidney development: renal
tubular dysgenesis. Kidney Int. 2010 Mar;77(5):400-6. doi: 10.1038/ki.2009.423.
Epub 2009 Nov 18. Citation on PubMed Moldavsky M. Renal tubular dysgenesis in Israel: pathologist's experience and
literature review. Isr Med Assoc J. 2009 Jan;11(1):6-10. Citation on PubMed Schreiber R, Gubler MC, Gribouval O, Shalev H, Landau D. Inherited renal
tubular dysgenesis may not be universally fatal. Pediatr Nephrol. 2010
Dec;25(12):2531-4. doi: 10.1007/s00467-010-1584-0. Epub 2010 Jul 6. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Kidney Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Chronic kidney disease Genetics Potter syndrome Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated May 1, 2013