Lactate dehydrogenase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Lactate dehydrogenase deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/lactate-dehydrogenase-deficiency/ Lactate dehydrogenase deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Lactate dehydrogenase deficiency is a condition that affects how the body breaks down sugar to use as energy in cells, primarily muscle cells. There are two types of this condition: lactate dehydrogenase-A deficiency (sometimes called glycogen storage disease XI) and lactate dehydrogenase-B deficiency. People with lactate dehydrogenase-A deficiency experience fatigue, muscle pain, and cramps during exercise (exercise intolerance). In some people with lactate dehydrogenase-A deficiency, high-intensity exercise or other strenuous activity leads to the breakdown of muscle tissue (rhabdomyolysis). The destruction of muscle tissue releases a protein called myoglobin, which is processed by the kidneys and released in the urine (myoglobinuria). Myoglobin causes the urine to be red or brown. This protein can also damage the kidneys , in some cases leading to life-threatening kidney failure. Some people with lactate dehydrogenase-A deficiency develop skin rashes. The severity of the signs and symptoms among individuals with lactate dehydrogenase-A deficiency varies greatly. People with lactate dehydrogenase-B deficiency typically do not have any signs or symptoms of the condition. They do not have difficulty with physical activity or any specific physical features related to the condition. Affected individuals are usually discovered only when routine blood tests reveal reduced lactate dehydrogenase activity. Frequency Lactate dehydrogenase deficiency is a rare disorder. In Japan, this condition affects 1 in 1 million individuals; the prevalence of lactate dehydrogenase deficiency in other countries is unknown. Causes Mutations in the LDHA gene cause lactate dehydrogenase-A deficiency, and mutations in the LDHB gene cause lactate dehydrogenase-B deficiency. These genes provide instructions for making the lactate dehydrogenase-A and lactate dehydrogenase-B pieces (subunits) of the lactate dehydrogenase enzyme. This enzyme is found throughout the body and is important for creating energy for cells. There are five different forms of this enzyme, each made up of four protein subunits. Various combinations of the lactate dehydrogenase-A and lactate dehydrogenase-B subunits make up the different forms of the enzyme. The version of lactate dehydrogenase made of four lactate dehydrogenase-A subunits is found primarily in skeletal muscles , which are muscles used for movement. Skeletal muscles need large amounts of energy during high-intensity physical activity when the body's oxygen intake is not sufficient for the amount of energy required (anaerobic exercise). During anaerobic exercise, the lactate dehydrogenase enzyme is involved in the breakdown of sugar stored in the muscles (in the form of glycogen ) to create additional energy. During the final stage of glycogen breakdown, lactate dehydrogenase converts a molecule called pyruvate to a similar molecule called lactate. Mutations in the LDHA gene result in the production of an abnormal lactate dehydrogenase-A subunit that cannot attach (bind) to other subunits to form the lactate dehydrogenase enzyme. A lack of functional subunit reduces the amount of enzyme that is formed, mostly affecting skeletal muscles.  As a result, glycogen is not broken down efficiently, leading to decreased energy in muscle cells. When muscle cells do not get sufficient energy during exercise or strenuous activity, the muscles become weak and muscle tissue can break down, as experienced by people with lactate dehydrogenase-A deficiency. The version of lactate dehydrogenase made of four lactate dehydrogenase-B subunits is found primarily in heart (cardiac) muscle . In cardiac muscle, lactate dehydrogenase converts lactate to pyruvate, which can participate in other chemical reactions to create energy. LDHB gene mutations lead to the production of an abnormal lactate dehydrogenase-B subunit that cannot form the lactate dehydrogenase enzyme. Even though lactate dehydrogenase activity is decreased in the cardiac muscle of people with lactate dehydrogenase-B deficiency, they do not appear to have any signs or symptoms related to their condition. It is unclear why this type of enzyme deficiency does not cause any health problems. Learn more about the genes associated with Lactate dehydrogenase deficiency LDHA LDHB Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Deficiency of lactate dehydrogenase Lactate dehydrogenase subunit deficiencies LDH deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Glycogen storage disease due to lactate dehydrogenase H-subunit deficiency Genetic Testing Registry: Glycogen storage disease due to lactate dehydrogenase M-subunit deficiency Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Glycogen storage disease due to lactate dehydrogenase deficiency Glycogen storage disease due to lactate dehydrogenase H-subunit deficiency Glycogen storage disease due to lactate dehydrogenase M-subunit deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM LACTATE DEHYDROGENASE B DEFICIENCY; LDHBD GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE XI; GSD11 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Kanno T, Maekawa M. Lactate dehydrogenase M-subunit deficiencies: clinical
features, metabolic background, and genetic heterogeneities. Muscle Nerve Suppl.
1995;3:S54-60. doi: 10.1002/mus.880181413. Citation on PubMed Lee BJ, Zand L, Manek NJ, Hsiao LL, Babovic-Vuksanovic D, Wylam ME, Qian Q.
Physical therapy-induced rhabdomyolysis and acute kidney injury associated with
reduced activity of muscle lactate dehydrogenase A. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken).
2011 Dec;63(12):1782-6. doi: 10.1002/acr.20584. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Maekawa M, Kanno T. Laboratory and clinical features of lactate dehydrogenase
subunit deficiencies. Clin Chim Acta. 1989 Dec 15;185(3):299-308. doi:
10.1016/0009-8981(89)90220-9. Citation on PubMed Miyajima H, Takahashi Y, Kaneko E. Characterization of the glycolysis in
lactate dehydrogenase-A deficiency. Muscle Nerve. 1995 Aug;18(8):874-8. doi:
10.1002/mus.880180812. Citation on PubMed Sudo K, Maekawa M, Kanno T, Li SS, Akizuki S, Magara T. Premature termination
mutations in two patients with deficiency of lactate dehydrogenase H(B) subunit.
Clin Chem. 1994 Aug;40(8):1567-70. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Carbohydrate Metabolism Disorders Genetic Disorders Muscle Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Lactate dehydrogenase test LDH isoenzyme blood test Related Medical Tests Lactate Dehydrogenase (LDH) Test Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2012