Baraitser-Winter syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Baraitser-Winter syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/baraitser-winter-syndrome/ Baraitser-Winter syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Baraitser-Winter syndrome is a condition that affects the development of many parts of the body, particularly the face and the brain . An unusual facial appearance is the most common characteristic of Baraitser-Winter syndrome. Distinctive facial features can include widely spaced eyes ( hypertelorism ), large eyelid openings, droopy eyelids ( ptosis ), high-arched eyebrows , a broad nasal bridge and tip of the nose , a long space between the nose and upper lip ( philtrum ), full cheeks , and a pointed chin . Structural brain abnormalities are also present in most people with Baraitser-Winter syndrome. These abnormalities are related to impaired neuronal migration, a process by which nerve cells (neurons) move to their proper positions in the developing brain. The most frequent brain abnormality associated with Baraitser-Winter syndrome is pachygyria, which is an area of the brain that has an abnormally smooth surface with fewer folds and grooves. Less commonly, affected individuals have lissencephaly, which is similar to pachygyria but involves the entire brain surface. These structural changes can cause mild to severe intellectual disability, developmental delay, and seizures. Other features of Baraitser-Winter syndrome can include short stature, ear abnormalities and hearing loss, heart defects, presence of an extra (duplicated) thumb , and abnormalities of the kidneys and urinary system. Some affected individuals have limited movement of large joints, such as the elbows and knees, which may be present at birth or develop over time. Rarely, people with Baraitser-Winter syndrome have involuntary muscle tensing (dystonia). Frequency Baraitser-Winter syndrome is a rare condition. Fewer than 50 cases have been reported in the medical literature. Causes Baraitser-Winter syndrome can result from mutations in either the ACTB or ACTG1 gene.  These genes provide instructions for making proteins called beta (β)-actin and gamma (γ)-actin, respectively. These proteins are active (expressed) in cells throughout the body. They are organized into a network of fibers called the actin cytoskeleton , which makes up the cell's structural framework. The actin cytoskeleton has several critical functions, including determining cell shape and allowing cells to move. Mutations in the ACTB or ACTG1 gene alter the function of β-actin or γ-actin. The malfunctioning actin causes changes in the actin cytoskeleton that modify the structure and organization of cells and affect their ability to move. Because these two actin proteins are present in cells throughout the body and are involved in many cell activities, problems with their function likely impact many aspects of development, including neuronal migration. These changes underlie the variety of signs and symptoms associated with Baraitser-Winter syndrome. Learn more about the genes associated with Baraitser-Winter syndrome ACTB ACTG1 Inheritance This condition is described as autosomal dominant , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. The condition almost always results from new (de novo) mutations in the ACTB or ACTG1 gene and occurs in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Other Names for This Condition BRWS Cerebro-frontofacial syndrome, type 3 Fryns-Aftimos syndrome Iris coloboma with ptosis, hypertelorism, and mental retardation Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Baraitser-Winter syndrome 1 Genetic Testing Registry: Baraitser-Winter Syndrome 2 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Baraitser-Winter cerebrofrontofacial syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM BARAITSER-WINTER SYNDROME 1; BRWS1 BARAITSER-WINTER SYNDROME 2; BRWS2 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Baraitser M, Winter RM. Iris coloboma, ptosis, hypertelorism, and mental
retardation: a new syndrome. J Med Genet. 1988 Jan;25(1):41-3. doi:
10.1136/jmg.25.1.41. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Pallotta R. Iris coloboma, ptosis, hypertelorism, and mental retardation: a
new syndrome possibly localised on chromosome 2. J Med Genet. 1991
May;28(5):342-4. doi: 10.1136/jmg.28.5.342. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Ramer JC, Lin AE, Dobyns WB, Winter R, Ayme S, Pallotta R, Ladda RL.
Previously apparently undescribed syndrome: shallow orbits, ptosis, coloboma,
trigonocephaly, gyral malformations, and mental and growth retardation. Am J Med
Genet. 1995 Jul 3;57(3):403-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320570308. Citation on PubMed Riviere JB, van Bon BW, Hoischen A, Kholmanskikh SS, O'Roak BJ, Gilissen C,
Gijsen S, Sullivan CT, Christian SL, Abdul-Rahman OA, Atkin JF, Chassaing N,
Drouin-Garraud V, Fry AE, Fryns JP, Gripp KW, Kempers M, Kleefstra T, Mancini GM,
Nowaczyk MJ, van Ravenswaaij-Arts CM, Roscioli T, Marble M, Rosenfeld JA, Siu VM,
de Vries BB, Shendure J, Verloes A, Veltman JA, Brunner HG, Ross ME, Pilz DT,
Dobyns WB. De novo mutations in the actin genes ACTB and ACTG1 cause
Baraitser-Winter syndrome. Nat Genet. 2012 Feb 26;44(4):440-4, S1-2. doi:
10.1038/ng.1091. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Rossi M, Guerrini R, Dobyns WB, Andria G, Winter RM. Characterization of brain
malformations in the Baraitser-Winter syndrome and review of the literature.
Neuropediatrics. 2003 Dec;34(6):287-92. doi: 10.1055/s-2003-44666. Citation on PubMed Verloes A. Iris coloboma, ptosis, hypertelorism, and mental retardation:
Baraitser-Winter syndrome or Noonan syndrome? J Med Genet. 1993 May;30(5):425-6.
doi: 10.1136/jmg.30.5.425. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Brain Malformations Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Coloboma of the iris Eyelid drooping Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated April 1, 2013