SUCLA2-related mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → SUCLA2-related mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/sucla2-related-mitochondrial-dna-depletion-syndrome/ SUCLA2-related mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description SUCLA2- related mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) depletion syndrome is an inherited disorder that affects the early development of the brain. Affected infants typically develop weak muscle tone (hypotonia) in the first few months of life. In these infants, hypotonia can delay the development of motor skills such as lifting the head and rolling over. Children with SUCLA2 -related mtDNA depletion syndrome typically have difficulty eating and may require a feeding tube; as a result, they have difficulty growing and gaining weight as expected (failure to thrive). Additional features of SUCLA2 -related mtDNA depletion syndrome can include uncontrolled movements (dystonia), hearing loss, muscle wasting (atrophy), and intellectual disabilities. In most affected children, a substance called methylmalonic acid builds up in the blood. People with SUCLA2 -related mtDNA depletion syndrome typically have a shortened lifespan. Approximately 30 percent of individuals with SUCLA2 -related mtDNA depletion syndrome do not survive past childhood. Frequency Approximately 60 people with SUCLA2 -related mtDNA depletion syndrome have been reported in the medical literature. This condition occurs more frequently among people from the Faroe Islands in the North Atlantic Ocean. Causes SUCLA2 -related mtDNA depletion syndrome is caused by variants (also called mutations) in the SUCLA2 gene. The SUCLA2 gene provides instructions for making one part (the beta subunit) of an enzyme called succinyl-CoA ligase. This enzyme plays an important role in mitochondria , which are the energy-producing centers inside the cell. Succinyl-CoA ligase is involved in producing and maintaining the molecules that make up mtDNA, which is essential for the normal function of mitochondria. Variants in the SUCLA2 gene lead to the production of an altered version of the beta subunit, which disrupts the normal function of succinyl-CoA ligase. A shortage (deficiency) of the normal enzyme leads to problems with the production and maintenance of mtDNA. A reduction in the amount of mtDNA (known as mtDNA depletion) impairs energy production in many of the body's cells and tissues. These problems lead to the characteristic features of SUCLA2 -related mtDNA depletion syndrome. Learn more about the gene associated with SUCLA2-related mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome SUCLA2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell must have a variant to cause the disorder. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome 5 (encephalomyopathic with or without methylmalonic aciduria) Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome, encephalomyopathic form with or without methylmalonic aciduria, autosomal recessive, SUCLA2-related MTDPS5 Succinate-CoA ligase deficiency SUCLA2 deficiency SUCLA2-related mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome, encephalomyopathic form with methylmalonic aciduria Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome, encephalomyopathic form with methylmalonic aciduria Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MITOCHONDRIAL DNA DEPLETION SYNDROME 5 (ENCEPHALOMYOPATHIC WITH OR WITHOUT METHYLMALONIC ACIDURIA); MTDPS5 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Alberio S, Mineri R, Tiranti V, Zeviani M. Depletion of mtDNA: syndromes and
genes. Mitochondrion. 2007 Feb-Apr;7(1-2):6-12. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2006.11.010.
Epub 2006 Dec 5. Citation on PubMed Carrozzo R, Dionisi-Vici C, Steuerwald U, Lucioli S, Deodato F, Di
Giandomenico S, Bertini E, Franke B, Kluijtmans LA, Meschini MC, Rizzo C,
Piemonte F, Rodenburg R, Santer R, Santorelli FM, van Rooij A, Vermunt-de Koning
D, Morava E, Wevers RA. SUCLA2 mutations are associated with mild methylmalonic
aciduria, Leigh-like encephalomyopathy, dystonia and deafness. Brain. 2007
Mar;130(Pt 3):862-74. doi: 10.1093/brain/awl389. Epub 2007 Feb 14. Citation on PubMed Carrozzo R, Verrigni D, Rasmussen M, de Coo R, Amartino H, Bianchi M, Buhas D,
Mesli S, Naess K, Born AP, Woldseth B, Prontera P, Batbayli M, Ravn K, Joensen F,
Cordelli DM, Santorelli FM, Tulinius M, Darin N, Duno M, Jouvencel P, Burlina A,
Stangoni G, Bertini E, Redonnet-Vernhet I, Wibrand F, Dionisi-Vici C, Uusimaa J,
Vieira P, Osorio AN, McFarland R, Taylor RW, Holme E, Ostergaard E. Succinate-CoA
ligase deficiency due to mutations in SUCLA2 and SUCLG1: phenotype and genotype
correlations in 71 patients. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2016 Mar;39(2):243-52. doi:
10.1007/s10545-015-9894-9. Epub 2015 Oct 16. Citation on PubMed El-Hattab AW, Scaglia F. SUCLA2-Related Mitochondrial DNA Depletion
Syndrome, Encephalomyopathic Form with Methylmalonic Aciduria. 2009 May 26
[updated 2023 Sep 28]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE,
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University
of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK6803/ Citation on PubMed Elpeleg O, Miller C, Hershkovitz E, Bitner-Glindzicz M, Bondi-Rubinstein G,
Rahman S, Pagnamenta A, Eshhar S, Saada A. Deficiency of the ADP-forming
succinyl-CoA synthase activity is associated with encephalomyopathy and
mitochondrial DNA depletion. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Jun;76(6):1081-6. doi:
10.1086/430843. Epub 2005 Apr 22. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Ostergaard E, Hansen FJ, Sorensen N, Duno M, Vissing J, Larsen PL, Faeroe O,
Thorgrimsson S, Wibrand F, Christensen E, Schwartz M. Mitochondrial
encephalomyopathy with elevated methylmalonic acid is caused by SUCLA2 mutations.
Brain. 2007 Mar;130(Pt 3):853-61. doi: 10.1093/brain/awl383. Epub 2007 Feb 7. Citation on PubMed Ostergaard E. Disorders caused by deficiency of succinate-CoA ligase. J
Inherit Metab Dis. 2008 Apr;31(2):226-9. doi: 10.1007/s10545-008-0828-7. Epub
2008 Apr 4. Citation on PubMed Spinazzola A, Invernizzi F, Carrara F, Lamantea E, Donati A, Dirocco M,
Giordano I, Meznaric-Petrusa M, Baruffini E, Ferrero I, Zeviani M. Clinical and
molecular features of mitochondrial DNA depletion syndromes. J Inherit Metab Dis.
2009 Apr;32(2):143-58. doi: 10.1007/s10545-008-1038-z. Epub 2008 Dec 27. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Mitochondrial Diseases Newborn Screening MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Hypotonia Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated July 19, 2024