Hepatic veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Hepatic veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/hepatic-veno-occlusive-disease-with-immunodeficiency/ Hepatic veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Hepatic veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency (VODI) is a disorder of the liver and immune system. Its signs and symptoms typically appear before six months of age. Hepatic veno-occlusive disease is a condition that blocks (occludes) small veins in the liver, disrupting blood flow in this organ. This condition can lead to enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly), a buildup of scar tissue (hepatic fibrosis), and liver failure. Children with VODI have immune systems that do not function normally. They are vulnerable to recurrent infections that are caused by certain bacteria, viruses, and fungi. Affected individuals experience frequent colds or bouts of pneumonia. The infections are likely related to lower-than-normal levels of immune system cells, including special proteins called antibodies or immunoglobulins, particularly immunoglobulin M ( IgM ), immunoglobulin G ( IgG ), and immunoglobulin A ( IgA ). Antibodies attach to specific foreign particles, marking them for destruction. These infections are usually serious and may be life-threatening. In most people with VODI, infections occur before hepatic veno-occlusive disease becomes evident. Some children with VODI have neurological problems due to blocked blood flow in the brain. If untreated, children with VODI do not survive past infancy. With treatment, many people with VODI can live into childhood and sometimes into their teens. Frequency VODI appears to be a rare disorder; more than 20 affected families have been reported worldwide. Though most of the people with this condition have been of Lebanese ancestry, this disorder has also been identified in individuals from other countries. Causes VODI is caused by variants (also called mutations) in the SP110 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called SP110 nuclear body protein. This protein plays a role in cell division, the self-destruction of cells that are damaged or no longer needed (apoptosis), and the normal function of the immune system. This protein likely helps regulate the activity of genes that are needed for the body's immune response to foreign invaders, such as viruses and bacteria. Variants in the SP110 gene prevent cells from making enough functional SP110 nuclear body protein to allow the immune system to fight off infections effectively. This loss of protein causes immunodeficiency in people with VODI. It is unclear whether a lack of functional protein causes liver disease or if the liver problems are a result of unregulated apoptosis or recurrent infections. Learn more about the gene associated with Hepatic veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency SP110 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell must have a variant to cause the disorder. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Familial veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency Hepatic venoocclusive disease with immunodeficiency Veno-occlusive disease and immunodeficiency syndrome VODI Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Hepatic veno-occlusive disease-immunodeficiency syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Hepatic veno-occlusive disease-immunodeficiency syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM HEPATIC VENOOCCLUSIVE DISEASE WITH IMMUNODEFICIENCY; VODI Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Cliffe ST, Wong M, Taylor PJ, Ruga E, Wilcken B, Lindeman R, Buckley MF,
Roscioli T. The first prenatal diagnosis for veno-occlusive disease and
immunodeficiency syndrome, an autosomal recessive condition associated with
mutations in SP110. Prenat Diagn. 2007 Jul;27(7):674-6. doi: 10.1002/pd.1759. Citation on PubMed Hamdoun O, Al Mulla A, Al Zaabi S, Shendi H, Al Ghamdi S, Hertecant J,
Al-Shibli A. Unique Mutation in SP110 Resulting in Hepatic Veno-Occlusive Disease
with Immunodeficiency. Case Rep Pediatr. 2020 Jan 10;2020:3460631. doi:
10.1155/2020/3460631. eCollection 2020. Citation on PubMed Roscioli T, Cliffe ST, Bloch DB, Bell CG, Mullan G, Taylor PJ, Sarris M, Wang
J, Donald JA, Kirk EP, Ziegler JB, Salzer U, McDonald GB, Wong M, Lindeman R,
Buckley MF. Mutations in the gene encoding the PML nuclear body protein Sp110 are
associated with immunodeficiency and hepatic veno-occlusive disease. Nat Genet.
2006 Jun;38(6):620-2. doi: 10.1038/ng1780. Epub 2006 Apr 30. Citation on PubMed Wong M. Hepatic Veno-Occlusive Disease with Immunodeficiency. 2007 Feb 21
[updated 2025 Jan 23]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE,
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University
of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1271/ Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Immune System and Disorders Liver Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 2, 2024