Autosomal dominant vitreoretinochoroidopathy: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Autosomal dominant vitreoretinochoroidopathy URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/autosomal-dominant-vitreoretinochoroidopathy/ Autosomal dominant vitreoretinochoroidopathy To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Autosomal dominant vitreoretinochoroidopathy (ADVIRC) is a  disorder that affects several parts of the eyes, including the clear gel that fills the eye (the vitreous), the light-sensitive tissue that lines the back of the eye (the retina ), and the network of blood vessels within the retina (the choroid). The eye abnormalities in ADVIRC can lead to varying degrees of vision impairment, from mild reduction to complete loss, although some people with the condition have normal vision. The signs and symptoms of ADVIRC vary, even among members of the same family.  Many affected individuals have microcornea, in which the clear front covering of the eye (cornea) is small and abnormally curved. The area behind the cornea can also be abnormally small, which is described as a shallow anterior chamber. Individuals with ADVIRC can develop increased pressure in the eyes ( glaucoma ) or clouding of the lens of the eye ( cataract ). In addition, some people have breakdown (degeneration) of the vitreous or the choroid. A characteristic feature of ADVIRC, visible with a special eye exam, is a circular band of excess coloring (hyperpigmentation) in the retina. This feature can help physicians diagnose the disorder. Affected individuals may also have white spots on the retina. Frequency ADVIRC is considered a rare disease. Its prevalence is unknown. Causes ADVIRC is caused by mutations in the BEST1 gene. The protein produced from this gene, called bestrophin-1, is thought to play a critical role in normal vision. Bestrophin-1 is found in a thin layer of cells at the back of the eye called the retinal pigment epithelium . This cell layer supports and nourishes the retina and is involved in growth and development of the eye, maintenance of the retina, and the normal function of specialized cells called photoreceptors that detect light and color. In the retinal pigment epithelium, bestrophin-1 functions as a channel that transports charged chlorine atoms (chloride ions) across the cell membrane. Mutations in the BEST1 gene alter how the gene's instructions are used to make bestrophin-1, which leads to production of versions of the protein that are missing certain segments or have extra segments. It is not clear how these versions of bestrophin affect chloride ion transport or lead to the eye abnormalities characteristic of ADVIRC. Researchers suspect that the abnormalities are related to defects in the retinal pigment epithelium or the photoreceptors. Learn more about the gene associated with Autosomal dominant vitreoretinochoroidopathy BEST1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition. Other Names for This Condition ADVIRC Vitreoretinochoroidopathy dominant Vitreoretinochoroidopathy with microcornea, glaucoma, and cataract Vitreoretinochoroidopathy, autosomal dominant, with nanophthalmos Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Autosomal dominant vitreoretinochoroidopathy Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Autosomal dominant vitreoretinochoroidopathy Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM VITREORETINOCHOROIDOPATHY; VRCP Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Burgess R, MacLaren RE, Davidson AE, Urquhart JE, Holder GE, Robson AG, Moore
AT, Keefe RO, Black GC, Manson FD. ADVIRC is caused by distinct mutations in
BEST1 that alter pre-mRNA splicing. J Med Genet. 2009 Sep;46(9):620-5. doi:
10.1136/jmg.2008.059881. Epub 2008 Jul 8. Citation on PubMed Vincent A, McAlister C, Vandenhoven C, Heon E. BEST1-related autosomal
dominant vitreoretinochoroidopathy: a degenerative disease with a range of
developmental ocular anomalies. Eye (Lond). 2011 Jan;25(1):113-8. doi:
10.1038/eye.2010.165. Epub 2010 Nov 12. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Yardley J, Leroy BP, Hart-Holden N, Lafaut BA, Loeys B, Messiaen LM, Perveen
R, Reddy MA, Bhattacharya SS, Traboulsi E, Baralle D, De Laey JJ, Puech B,
Kestelyn P, Moore AT, Manson FD, Black GC. Mutations of VMD2 splicing regulators
cause nanophthalmos and autosomal dominant vitreoretinochoroidopathy (ADVIRC).
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2004 Oct;45(10):3683-9. doi: 10.1167/iovs.04-0550. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Eye Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated November 1, 2014