SADDAN: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → SADDAN URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/saddan/ SADDAN To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description SADDAN (severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans) is a rare disorder of bone growth characterized by skeletal, brain, and skin abnormalities. All people with this condition have extremely short stature with particularly short arms and legs. Other features include unusual bowing of the leg bones; a small chest with short ribs and curved collar bones; short, broad fingers; and folds of extra skin on the arms and legs.  Structural abnormalities of the brain cause seizures, profound developmental delay, and intellectual disability. Several affected individuals also have had episodes in which their breathing slows or stops for short periods (apnea).  Acanthosis nigricans, a progressive skin disorder characterized by thick, dark, velvety skin, is another characteristic feature of SADDAN that develops in infancy or early childhood. Frequency This disorder is very rare; it has been described in only a small number of individuals worldwide. Causes Mutations in the FGFR3 gene cause SADDAN. The FGFR3 gene provides instructions for making a protein that is involved in the development and maintenance of bone and brain tissue. A mutation in this gene may cause the FGFR3 protein to be overly active, which leads to the disturbances in bone growth that are characteristic of this disorder. Researchers have not determined how the mutation disrupts brain development or causes acanthosis nigricans. Learn more about the gene associated with SADDAN FGFR3 Inheritance SADDAN is considered an autosomal dominant disorder because one mutated copy of the FGFR3 gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. The few described cases of SADDAN have been caused by new mutations in the FGFR3 gene and occurred in people with no history of the disorder in their family. No individuals with this disorder are known to have had children; therefore, the disorder has not been passed to the next generation. Other Names for This Condition Achondroplasia, severe, with developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans SADDAN dysplasia Severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans Skeleton-skin-brain syndrome SSB syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Severe achondroplasia-developmental delay-acanthosis nigricans syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Severe achondroplasia-developmental delay-acanthosis nigricans syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM ACHONDROPLASIA, SEVERE, WITH DEVELOPMENTAL DELAY AND ACANTHOSIS NIGRICANS; SADDAN Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bellus GA, Bamshad MJ, Przylepa KA, Dorst J, Lee RR, Hurko O, Jabs EW, Curry
CJ, Wilcox WR, Lachman RS, Rimoin DL, Francomano CA. Severe achondroplasia with
developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans (SADDAN): phenotypic analysis of a
new skeletal dysplasia caused by a Lys650Met mutation in fibroblast growth factor
receptor 3. Am J Med Genet. 1999 Jul 2;85(1):53-65. Citation on PubMed Cohen MM Jr. Some chondrodysplasias with short limbs: molecular perspectives.
Am J Med Genet. 2002 Oct 15;112(3):304-13. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.10780. Citation on PubMed Kumar KV, Shaikh A, Sharma R, Prusty P. SADDAN syndrome. J Pediatr Endocrinol
Metab. 2011;24(9-10):851-2. doi: 10.1515/jpem.2011.290. Citation on PubMed Vajo Z, Francomano CA, Wilkin DJ. The molecular and genetic basis of
fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 disorders: the achondroplasia family of
skeletal dysplasias, Muenke craniosynostosis, and Crouzon syndrome with
acanthosis nigricans. Endocr Rev. 2000 Feb;21(1):23-39. doi:
10.1210/edrv.21.1.0387. Citation on PubMed Zankl A, Elakis G, Susman RD, Inglis G, Gardener G, Buckley MF, Roscioli T.
Prenatal and postnatal presentation of severe achondroplasia with developmental
delay and acanthosis nigricans (SADDAN) due to the FGFR3 Lys650Met mutation. Am J
Med Genet A. 2008 Jan 15;146A(2):212-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32085. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Dwarfism Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Acanthosis nigricans Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated October 1, 2012