Char syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Char syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/char-syndrome/ Char syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Char syndrome is a condition that affects the development of the face, heart, and limbs.  It is characterized by a combination of three major features: a distinctive facial appearance, a heart defect called patent ductus arteriosus, and hand abnormalities. Most people with Char syndrome have a characteristic facial appearance that includes flattened cheek bones and a flat nasal bridge (the area of the nose between the eyes). The tip of the nose is also flat and broad. The eyes are wide-set with droopy eyelids ( ptosis ) and outside corners that point downward ( down-slanting palpebral fissures ). Additional facial differences include a shortened distance between the nose and upper lip (a short philtrum), a triangular-shaped mouth, and thick, prominent lips. Patent ductus arteriosus is a common heart defect in newborns, and it occurs in most babies with Char syndrome. Before birth, the ductus arteriosus forms a connection between two major arteries (the aorta and the pulmonary artery). This connection normally closes shortly after birth, but it remains open in babies with patent ductus arteriosus.  If untreated, this heart defect causes infants to breathe rapidly, feed poorly, and gain weight slowly. In severe cases, it can lead to heart failure. People with patent ductus arteriosus also have an increased risk of infection. Hand abnormalities are another feature of Char syndrome. In most people with this condition, the middle section of the fifth (pinky) finger is shortened or absent. Other abnormalities of the hands and feet have been reported but are less common. Frequency Char syndrome is rare, although its exact incidence is unknown.  Only a few families with this condition have been identified worldwide. Causes Variants (also known as mutations) in the TFAP2B gene cause Char syndrome. This gene provides instructions for making a protein known as transcription factor AP-2β. A transcription factor is a protein that attaches (binds) to specific regions of DNA and helps control the activity of particular genes. Transcription factor AP-2β regulates genes that are involved in development before birth. In particular, this protein appears to play a role in the normal formation of structures in the face, heart, and limbs. TFAP2B variants alter the structure of transcription factor AP-2β. Some of these variants prevent the protein from binding to DNA, while other variants render it unable to regulate the activity of other genes. A loss of this protein's function disrupts the normal development of several parts of the body before birth, resulting in the major features of Char syndrome. Learn more about the gene associated with Char syndrome TFAP2B Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In some cases, an affected person inherits the variant from one affected parent .  Other cases may result from new variants in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Other Names for This Condition Patent ductus arteriosus with facial dysmorphism and abnormal fifth digits Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Char syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Char syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CHAR SYNDROME; CHAR Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Gelb BD. Char Syndrome. 2003 Aug 15 [updated 2020 May 21]. In: Adam MP,
Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington,
Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1106/ Citation on PubMed Mani A, Radhakrishnan J, Farhi A, Carew KS, Warnes CA, Nelson-Williams C, Day
RW, Pober B, State MW, Lifton RP. Syndromic patent ductus arteriosus: evidence
for haploinsufficient TFAP2B mutations and identification of a linked sleep
disorder. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Feb 22;102(8):2975-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0409852102. Epub 2005 Jan 31. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Satoda M, Pierpont ME, Diaz GA, Bornemeier RA, Gelb BD. Char syndrome, an
inherited disorder with patent ductus arteriosus, maps to chromosome 6p12-p21.
Circulation. 1999 Jun 15;99(23):3036-42. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.99.23.3036. Citation on PubMed Satoda M, Zhao F, Diaz GA, Burn J, Goodship J, Davidson HR, Pierpont ME, Gelb
BD. Mutations in TFAP2B cause Char syndrome, a familial form of patent ductus
arteriosus. Nat Genet. 2000 May;25(1):42-6. doi: 10.1038/75578. Citation on PubMed Slavotinek A, Clayton-Smith J, Super M. Familial patent ductus arteriosus: a
further case of CHAR syndrome. Am J Med Genet. 1997 Aug 8;71(2):229-32. Citation on PubMed Sweeney E, Fryer A, Walters M. Char syndrome: a new family and review of the
literature emphasising the presence of symphalangism and the variable phenotype.
Clin Dysmorphol. 2000 Jul;9(3):177-82. doi: 10.1097/00019605-200009030-00005. Citation on PubMed Zannolli R, Mostardini R, Matera M, Pucci L, Gelb BD, Morgese G. Char
syndrome: an additional family with polythelia, a new finding. Am J Med Genet.
2000 Nov 27;95(3):201-3. doi:
10.1002/1096-8628(20001127)95:33.0.co;2-w. Citation on PubMed Zhao F, Weismann CG, Satoda M, Pierpont ME, Sweeney E, Thompson EM, Gelb BD.
Novel TFAP2B mutations that cause Char syndrome provide a genotype-phenotype
correlation. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Oct;69(4):695-703. doi: 10.1086/323410. Epub
2001 Aug 14. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Congenital Heart Defects Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Patent ductus arteriosus Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 8, 2022