Lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/lymphedema-distichiasis-syndrome/ Lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome is a condition that affects the normal function of the lymphatic system , which is a part of the circulatory and immune systems. The lymphatic system produces and transports fluids and immune cells throughout the body. People with lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome develop puffiness or swelling ( lymphedema ) of the limbs, typically the legs and feet. Another characteristic of this syndrome is the growth of extra eyelashes (distichiasis), ranging from a few extra eyelashes to a full extra set on both the upper and lower lids. These eyelashes do not grow along the edge of the eyelid,  but out of its inner lining. When the abnormal eyelashes touch the eyeball, they can cause damage to the clear covering of the eye (cornea). Related eye problems can include an irregular curvature of the cornea causing blurred vision ( astigmatism ) or scarring of the cornea. Other health problems associated with this disorder include swollen and knotted (varicose) veins, droopy eyelids (ptosis), heart abnormalities, and an opening in the roof of the mouth ( a cleft palate ). All people with lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome have extra eyelashes present at birth. The age of onset of lymphedema varies, but it most often begins during puberty. Males usually develop lymphedema earlier than females, but all affected individuals will develop lymphedema by the time they are in their forties. Frequency The prevalence of lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome is unknown.   Because the extra eyelashes can be overlooked during a medical examination, researchers believe that some people with this condition may be misdiagnosed as having lymphedema only. Causes Lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome is caused by mutations in the FOXC2 gene. The FOXC2 gene provides instructions for making a protein that plays a critical role in the formation of many organs and tissues before birth. The FOXC2 protein is a transcription factor, which means that it attaches (binds) to specific regions of DNA and helps control the activity of many other genes. Researchers believe that the FOXC2 protein has a role in a variety of developmental processes, such as the formation of veins and the development of the lungs, eyes, kidneys and urinary tract, cardiovascular system, and the transport system for immune cells (lymphatic vessels). Learn more about the gene associated with Lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome FOXC2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition Distichiasis-lymphedema syndrome Lymphedema with distichiasis Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Distichiasis-lymphedema syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM LYMPHEDEMA-DISTICHIASIS SYNDROME; LPHDST Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Brice G, Mansour S, Bell R, Collin JR, Child AH, Brady AF, Sarfarazi M,
Burnand KG, Jeffery S, Mortimer P, Murday VA. Analysis of the phenotypic
abnormalities in lymphoedema-distichiasis syndrome in 74 patients with FOXC2
mutations or linkage to 16q24. J Med Genet. 2002 Jul;39(7):478-83. doi:
10.1136/jmg.39.7.478. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Erickson RP, Dagenais SL, Caulder MS, Downs CA, Herman G, Jones MC,
Kerstjens-Frederikse WS, Lidral AC, McDonald M, Nelson CC, Witte M, Glover TW.
Clinical heterogeneity in lymphoedema-distichiasis with FOXC2 truncating
mutations. J Med Genet. 2001 Nov;38(11):761-6. doi: 10.1136/jmg.38.11.761. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Fang J, Dagenais SL, Erickson RP, Arlt MF, Glynn MW, Gorski JL, Seaver LH,
Glover TW. Mutations in FOXC2 (MFH-1), a forkhead family transcription factor,
are responsible for the hereditary lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome. Am J Hum
Genet. 2000 Dec;67(6):1382-8. doi: 10.1086/316915. Epub 2000 Nov 8. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Mellor RH, Brice G, Stanton AW, French J, Smith A, Jeffery S, Levick JR,
Burnand KG, Mortimer PS; Lymphoedema Research Consortium. Mutations in FOXC2 are
strongly associated with primary valve failure in veins of the lower limb.
Circulation. 2007 Apr 10;115(14):1912-20. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.675348.
Epub 2007 Mar 19. Citation on PubMed Sutkowska E, Bator A, Trompeta K, Szuba A. Different lymphscintigraphic
patterns in patients with lymphedema distichiasis. Lymphology. 2010
Jun;43(2):73-7. Citation on PubMed Vreeburg M, Heitink MV, Damstra RJ, Moog U, van Geel M, van Steensel MA.
Lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome: a distinct type of primary lymphedema caused by
mutations in the FOXC2 gene. Int J Dermatol. 2008 Nov;47 Suppl 1:52-5. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-4632.2008.03962.x. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Lymphedema MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Lymph system Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2014