Greenberg dysplasia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Greenberg dysplasia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/greenberg-dysplasia/ Greenberg dysplasia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Greenberg dysplasia is a severe condition characterized by specific bone abnormalities in the developing fetus. This condition is fatal before birth. The bones of affected individuals do not develop properly, causing a distinctive spotted appearance called moth-eaten bone, which is visible on x-ray images. In addition, the bones have abnormal calcium deposits (ectopic calcification). Affected individuals have extremely short bones in the arms and legs and abnormally flat vertebrae (platyspondyly). Other skeletal abnormalities may include short ribs and extra fingers ( polydactyly ). In addition, affected fetuses have extensive swelling of the body caused by fluid accumulation (hydrops fetalis). Greenberg dysplasia is also called hydrops-ectopic calcification-moth-eaten skeletal dysplasia (HEM), which reflects the condition's most common features. Frequency Greenberg dysplasia is a very rare condition. Approximately ten cases have been reported in the scientific literature. Causes Mutations in the LBR gene cause Greenberg dysplasia. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called the lamin B receptor. One region of this protein, called the sterol reductase domain, plays an important role in the production (synthesis) of cholesterol. Cholesterol is a type of fat that is produced in the body and obtained from foods that come from animals: eggs, meat, fish, and dairy products. Cholesterol is necessary for normal embryonic development and has important functions both before and after birth. Cholesterol is an important component of cell membranes and the protective substance covering nerve cells ( myelin ). Additionally, cholesterol plays a role in the production of certain hormones and digestive acids. During cholesterol synthesis, the sterol reductase function of the lamin B receptor allows the protein to perform one of several steps that convert a molecule called lanosterol to cholesterol. LBR gene mutations involved in Greenberg dysplasia lead to loss of the sterol reductase function of the lamin B receptor, and research suggests that this loss causes the condition. Absence of the sterol reductase function disrupts the normal synthesis of cholesterol within cells. This absence may also allow potentially toxic byproducts of cholesterol synthesis to build up in the body's tissues. Researchers suspect that low cholesterol levels or an accumulation of other substances disrupts the growth and development of many parts of the body. It is not known, however, how a disturbance of cholesterol synthesis leads to the specific features of Greenberg dysplasia. Learn more about the gene associated with Greenberg dysplasia LBR Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Chondrodystrophy, hydropic and prenatally lethal type Greenberg skeletal dysplasia HEM dysplasia HEM skeletal dysplasia Hydrops - ectopic calcification - moth-eaten skeletal dysplasia Moth-eaten skeletal dysplasia Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Greenberg dysplasia Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Greenberg dysplasia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM GREENBERG DYSPLASIA; GRBGD Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Clayton P, Fischer B, Mann A, Mansour S, Rossier E, Veen M, Lang C, Baasanjav
S, Kieslich M, Brossuleit K, Gravemann S, Schnipper N, Karbasyian M, Demuth I,
Zwerger M, Vaya A, Utermann G, Mundlos S, Stricker S, Sperling K, Hoffmann K.
Mutations causing Greenberg dysplasia but not Pelger anomaly uncouple enzymatic
from structural functions of a nuclear membrane protein. Nucleus. 2010
Jul-Aug;1(4):354-66. doi: 10.4161/nucl.1.4.12435. Epub 2010 May 21. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Duband-Goulet I, Courvalin JC. Inner nuclear membrane protein LBR
preferentially interacts with DNA secondary structures and nucleosomal linker.
Biochemistry. 2000 May 30;39(21):6483-8. doi: 10.1021/bi992908b. Citation on PubMed Silve S, Dupuy PH, Ferrara P, Loison G. Human lamin B receptor exhibits sterol
C14-reductase activity in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998
Jun 15;1392(2-3):233-44. doi: 10.1016/s0005-2760(98)00041-1. Citation on PubMed Trajkovski Z, Vrcakovski M, Saveski J, Gucev ZS. Greenberg dysplasia
(hydrops-ectopic calcification-moth-eaten skeletal dysplasia): prenatal
ultrasound diagnosis and review of literature. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Sep
1;111(4):415-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.10578. Citation on PubMed Tseng LC, Chen RH. Temporal control of nuclear envelope assembly by
phosphorylation of lamin B receptor. Mol Biol Cell. 2011 Sep;22(18):3306-17. doi:
10.1091/mbc.E11-03-0199. Epub 2011 Jul 27. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Waterham HR, Koster J, Mooyer P, Noort Gv Gv, Kelley RI, Wilcox WR, Wanders
RJ, Hennekam RC, Oosterwijk JC. Autosomal recessive HEM/Greenberg skeletal
dysplasia is caused by 3 beta-hydroxysterol delta 14-reductase deficiency due to
mutations in the lamin B receptor gene. Am J Hum Genet. 2003 Apr;72(4):1013-7.
doi: 10.1086/373938. Epub 2003 Feb 28. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Bone Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Hydrops fetalis Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2012