Aromatase excess syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Aromatase excess syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/aromatase-excess-syndrome/ Aromatase excess syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Aromatase excess syndrome is a condition characterized by elevated levels of the female sex hormone estrogen in both males and females. Males with aromatase excess syndrome experience breast enlargement (gynecomastia) in late childhood or adolescence. The bones of affected males grow and develop more quickly and stop growing sooner than usual (advanced bone age). As a result males have an early growth spurt, typically during late childhood, with short stature as an adult. Affected females rarely show signs and symptoms of the condition, but they may have increased breast growth (macromastia), irregular menstrual periods, and short stature. The ability to have children (fertility) is usually normal in both males and females with aromatase excess syndrome. Frequency The prevalence of aromatase excess syndrome is unknown; more than 20 cases have been described in the medical literature. Causes Rearrangements of genetic material involving the CYP19A1 gene cause aromatase excess syndrome. The CYP19A1 gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called aromatase. This enzyme converts a class of hormones called androgens, which are involved in male sexual development, to different forms of estrogen. In females, estrogen guides female sexual development before birth and during puberty. In both males and females, estrogen plays a role in regulating bone growth. The condition can result from several types of genetic rearrangements involving the CYP19A1 gene. These rearrangements alter the activity of the gene and lead to an increase in aromatase production. In affected males, the increased aromatase and subsequent conversion of androgens to estrogen are responsible for the gynecomastia and limited bone growth characteristic of aromatase excess syndrome. Increased estrogen in females can cause symptoms such as irregular menstrual periods and short stature. Learn more about the gene associated with Aromatase excess syndrome CYP19A1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means a genetic rearrangement involving one copy of the CYP19A1 gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent . Other cases result from new genetic changes and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Other Names for This Condition AEXS Familial gynecomastia due to increased aromatase activity Hereditary gynecomastia Increased aromatase activity Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Aromatase excess syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Aromatase excess syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM AROMATASE EXCESS SYNDROME; AEXS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Fukami M, Shozu M, Ogata T. Molecular bases and phenotypic determinants of
aromatase excess syndrome. Int J Endocrinol. 2012;2012:584807. doi:
10.1155/2012/584807. Epub 2012 Jan 26. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Fukami M, Shozu M, Soneda S, Kato F, Inagaki A, Takagi H, Hanaki K, Kanzaki S,
Ohyama K, Sano T, Nishigaki T, Yokoya S, Binder G, Horikawa R, Ogata T. Aromatase
excess syndrome: identification of cryptic duplications and deletions leading to
gain of function of CYP19A1 and assessment of phenotypic determinants. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Jun;96(6):E1035-43. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-0145. Epub 2011
Apr 6. Citation on PubMed Fukami M, Tsuchiya T, Vollbach H, Brown KA, Abe S, Ohtsu S, Wabitsch M, Burger
H, Simpson ER, Umezawa A, Shihara D, Nakabayashi K, Bulun SE, Shozu M, Ogata T.
Genomic basis of aromatase excess syndrome: recombination- and
replication-mediated rearrangements leading to CYP19A1 overexpression. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Dec;98(12):E2013-21. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-2520. Epub 2013
Sep 24. Citation on PubMed Shihara D, Miyado M, Nakabayashi K, Shozu M, Ogata T, Nagasaki K, Fukami M.
Aromatase excess syndrome in a family with upstream deletion of CYP19A1. Clin
Endocrinol (Oxf). 2014 Aug;81(2):314-6. doi: 10.1111/cen.12329. Epub 2013 Oct 18.
No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Endocrine Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Breast enlargement in males Genetics Vaginal or uterine bleeding Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated April 1, 2014