Atelosteogenesis type 3: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Atelosteogenesis type 3 URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/atelosteogenesis-type-3/ Atelosteogenesis type 3 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Atelosteogenesis type 3 is a disorder that affects the development of bones throughout the body. Affected individuals are born with inward- and upward-turning feet ( clubfeet ) and dislocations of the hips, knees, and elbows. Bones in the spine, rib cage, pelvis, and limbs may be underdeveloped or in some cases absent. As a result of the limb bone abnormalities, individuals with this condition have very short arms and legs. Their hands and feet are wide, with broad fingers and toes that may be permanently bent ( camptodactyly ) or fused together ( syndactyly ). Characteristic facial features include a broad forehead , wide-set eyes ( hypertelorism ), and an underdeveloped nose. About half of affected individuals have an opening in the roof of the mouth (a cleft palate .) Individuals with atelosteogenesis type 3 typically have an underdeveloped rib cage that affects the development and functioning of the lungs. As a result, affected individuals are usually stillborn or die shortly after birth from respiratory failure. Some affected individuals survive longer, usually with intensive medical support. They typically experience further respiratory problems as a result of weakness of the airways that can lead to partial closing, short pauses in breathing (apnea), or frequent infections. People with atelosteogenesis type 3 who survive past the newborn period may have learning disabilities and delayed language skills, which are probably caused by low levels of oxygen in the brain due to respiratory problems. As a result of their orthopedic abnormalities, they also have delayed development of motor skills such as standing and walking. Frequency Atelosteogenesis type 3 is a rare disorder; its exact prevalence is unknown. About two dozen affected individuals have been identified. Causes Mutations in the FLNB gene cause atelosteogenesis type 3. The FLNB gene provides instructions for making a protein called filamin B. This protein helps build the network of protein filaments ( cytoskeleton ) that gives structure to cells and allows them to change shape and move. Filamin B attaches (binds) to another protein called actin and helps the actin to form the branching network of filaments that makes up the cytoskeleton. It also links actin to many other proteins to perform various functions within the cell, including the cell signaling that helps determine how the cytoskeleton will change as tissues grow and take shape during development. Filamin B is especially important in the development of the skeleton before birth. It is active (expressed) in the cell membranes of cartilage-forming cells (chondrocytes). Cartilage is a tough, flexible tissue that makes up much of the skeleton during early development. Most cartilage is later converted to bone (a process called ossification), except for the cartilage that continues to cover and protect the ends of bones and is present in the nose, airways ( trachea and bronchi ), and external ears. Filamin B appears to be important for normal cell growth and division (proliferation) and maturation (differentiation) of chondrocytes and for the ossification of cartilage. FLNB gene mutations that cause atelosteogenesis type 3 change single protein building blocks (amino acids) in the filamin B protein or delete a small section of the protein sequence, resulting in an abnormal protein. This abnormal protein appears to have a new, atypical function that interferes with the proliferation or differentiation of chondrocytes, impairing ossification and leading to the signs and symptoms of atelosteogenesis type 3. Learn more about the gene associated with Atelosteogenesis type 3 FLNB Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Most cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Other Names for This Condition AOIII Atelosteogenesis type III Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Atelosteogenesis type III Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Atelosteogenesis type III Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM ATELOSTEOGENESIS, TYPE III; AO3 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Farrington-Rock C, Firestein MH, Bicknell LS, Superti-Furga A, Bacino CA,
Cormier-Daire V, Le Merrer M, Baumann C, Roume J, Rump P, Verheij JB, Sweeney E,
Rimoin DL, Lachman RS, Robertson SP, Cohn DH, Krakow D. Mutations in two regions
of FLNB result in atelosteogenesis I and III. Hum Mutat. 2006 Jul;27(7):705-10.
doi: 10.1002/humu.20348. Citation on PubMed Krakow D, Robertson SP, King LM, Morgan T, Sebald ET, Bertolotto C,
Wachsmann-Hogiu S, Acuna D, Shapiro SS, Takafuta T, Aftimos S, Kim CA, Firth H,
Steiner CE, Cormier-Daire V, Superti-Furga A, Bonafe L, Graham JM Jr, Grix A,
Bacino CA, Allanson J, Bialer MG, Lachman RS, Rimoin DL, Cohn DH. Mutations in
the gene encoding filamin B disrupt vertebral segmentation, joint formation and
skeletogenesis. Nat Genet. 2004 Apr;36(4):405-10. doi: 10.1038/ng1319. Epub 2004
Feb 29. Citation on PubMed Sawyer GM, Clark AR, Robertson SP, Sutherland-Smith AJ. Disease-associated
substitutions in the filamin B actin binding domain confer enhanced actin binding
affinity in the absence of major structural disturbance: Insights from the
crystal structures of filamin B actin binding domains. J Mol Biol. 2009 Jul
31;390(5):1030-47. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.06.009. Epub 2009 Jun 6. Citation on PubMed Schultz C, Langer LO, Laxova R, Pauli RM. Atelosteogenesis type III: long term
survival, prenatal diagnosis, and evidence for dominant transmission. Am J Med
Genet. 1999 Mar 5;83(1):28-42. doi:
10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(19990305)83:13.0.co;2-g. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Bone Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated September 1, 2011