Hereditary angiopathy with nephropathy, aneurysms, and muscle cramps syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Hereditary angiopathy with nephropathy, aneurysms, and muscle cramps syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/hereditary-angiopathy-with-nephropathy-aneurysms-and-muscle-cramps-syndrome/ Hereditary angiopathy with nephropathy, aneurysms, and muscle cramps syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Hereditary angiopathy with nephropathy, aneurysms, and muscle cramps (HANAC) syndrome is part of a group of conditions called the COL4A1 -related disorders. The conditions in this group have a range of signs and symptoms that involve fragile blood vessels. HANAC syndrome is characterized by angiopathy, which is a disorder of the blood vessels . In people with HANAC syndrome, angiopathy affects several parts of the body. The blood vessels as well as thin sheet-like structures called basement membranes that separate and support cells are weakened and more susceptible to breakage. People with HANAC syndrome develop kidney disease (nephropathy). Fragile or damaged blood vessels or basement membranes in the kidneys can lead to blood in the urine (hematuria). Cysts can also form in one or both kidneys, and the cysts may grow larger over time. Compared to other COL4A1 -related disorders, the brain is only mildly affected in HANAC syndrome. People with this condition may have a bulge in one or multiple blood vessels in the brain (intracranial aneurysms). These aneurysms have the potential to burst, causing bleeding within the brain ( hemorrhagic stroke ). However, in people with HANAC syndrome, these aneurysms typically do not burst. About half of people with this condition also have leukoencephalopathy, which is a change in a type of brain tissue called white matter that can be seen with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Muscle cramps experienced by most people with HANAC syndrome typically begin in early childhood. Any muscle may be affected, and cramps usually last from a few seconds to a few minutes, although in some cases they can last for several hours. Muscle cramps can be spontaneous or triggered by exercise. Individuals with HANAC syndrome also experience a variety of eye problems. All individuals with this condition have arteries that twist and turn abnormally within the light-sensitive tissue at the back of the eyes (arterial retinal tortuosity). This blood vessel abnormality can cause episodes of bleeding within the eyes following any minor trauma to the eyes, leading to temporary vision loss. Other eye problems associated with HANAC syndrome include a clouding of the lens of the eye ( cataract ) and an abnormality called Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly. Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly is associated with various other eye abnormalities, including underdevelopment and eventual tearing of the colored part of the eye (iris), and a pupil that is not in the center of the eye. Rarely, affected individuals will have a condition called Raynaud phenomenon in which the blood vessels in the fingers and toes temporarily narrow, restricting blood flow to the fingertips and the ends of the toes. As a result, the skin around the affected area may turn white or blue for a brief period of time and the area may tingle or throb. Raynaud phenomenon is typically triggered by changes in temperature and usually causes no long term damage. Frequency HANAC syndrome is a rare condition, although the exact prevalence is unknown. At least six affected families have been described in the scientific literature. Causes Mutations in the COL4A1 gene cause HANAC syndrome. The COL4A1 gene provides instructions for making one component of a protein called type IV collagen . Type IV collagen molecules attach to each other to form complex protein networks. These protein networks are the main component of basement membranes, which are thin sheet-like structures that separate and support cells in many tissues. Type IV collagen networks play an important role in the basement membranes in virtually all tissues throughout the body, particularly the basement membranes surrounding the body's blood vessels (vasculature). The COL4A1 gene mutations that cause HANAC syndrome result in the production of a protein that disrupts the structure of type IV collagen. As a result, type IV collagen molecules cannot attach to each other to form the protein networks in basement membranes. Basement membranes without these networks are unstable, leading to weakening of the tissues that they surround. In people with HANAC syndrome, the vasculature and other tissues within the kidneys, brain, muscles, eyes, and throughout the body weaken. Learn more about the gene associated with Hereditary angiopathy with nephropathy, aneurysms, and muscle cramps syndrome COL4A1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition Autosomal dominant familial hematuria, retinal arteriolar tortuosity, contractures HANAC HANAC syndrome Hereditary angiopathy with nephropathy, aneurysm, and muscle cramps syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Autosomal dominant familial hematuria-retinal arteriolar tortuosity-contractures syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center HANAC syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM ANGIOPATHY, HEREDITARY, WITH NEPHROPATHY, ANEURYSMS, AND MUSCLE CRAMPS; HANAC Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Alamowitch S, Plaisier E, Favrole P, Prost C, Chen Z, Van Agtmael T, Marro B,
Ronco P. Cerebrovascular disease related to COL4A1 mutations in HANAC syndrome.
Neurology. 2009 Dec 1;73(22):1873-82. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181c3fd12. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Plaisier E, Chen Z, Gekeler F, Benhassine S, Dahan K, Marro B, Alamowitch S,
Paques M, Ronco P. Novel COL4A1 mutations associated with HANAC syndrome: a role
for the triple helical CB3[IV] domain. Am J Med Genet A. 2010
Oct;152A(10):2550-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33659. Citation on PubMed Vahedi K, Alamowitch S. Clinical spectrum of type IV collagen (COL4A1)
mutations: a novel genetic multisystem disease. Curr Opin Neurol. 2011
Feb;24(1):63-8. doi: 10.1097/WCO.0b013e32834232c6. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Eye Diseases Genetic Disorders Muscle Cramps Vascular Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated September 1, 2011