Malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/malonyl-coa-decarboxylase-deficiency/ Malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency is a condition that prevents the body from converting certain fats to energy. The signs and symptoms of this disorder typically appear in early childhood. Almost all affected children have delayed development. Additional signs and symptoms can include weak muscle tone (hypotonia), seizures, diarrhea, vomiting, and low blood sugar (hypoglycemia). A heart condition called cardiomyopathy, which weakens and enlarges the heart muscle, is another common feature of malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency. Frequency This condition is very rare; fewer than 30 cases have been reported. Causes Mutations in the MLYCD gene cause malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency. The MLYCD gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called malonyl-CoA decarboxylase. Within cells, this enzyme helps regulate the formation and breakdown of a group of fats called fatty acids. Many tissues, including the heart muscle, use fatty acids as a major source of energy. Mutations in the MLYCD gene reduce or eliminate the function of malonyl-CoA decarboxylase. A shortage of this enzyme disrupts the normal balance of fatty acid formation and breakdown in the body. As a result, fatty acids cannot be converted to energy, which can lead to characteristic features of this disorder including hypoglycemia and cardiomyopathy. Byproducts of fatty acid processing build up in tissues, which also contributes to the signs and symptoms of malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency. Learn more about the gene associated with Malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency MLYCD Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Deficiency of malonyl-CoA decarboxylase Malonic aciduria Malonyl-coenzyme A decarboxylase deficiency MCD deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Deficiency of malonyl-CoA decarboxylase Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Malonic aciduria Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MALONYL-CoA DECARBOXYLASE DEFICIENCY Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References de Wit MC, de Coo IF, Verbeek E, Schot R, Schoonderwoerd GC, Duran M, de Klerk
JB, Huijmans JG, Lequin MH, Verheijen FW, Mancini GM. Brain abnormalities in a
case of malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency. Mol Genet Metab. 2006
Feb;87(2):102-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2005.09.009. Epub 2005 Nov 4. Citation on PubMed FitzPatrick DR, Hill A, Tolmie JL, Thorburn DR, Christodoulou J. The molecular
basis of malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency. Am J Hum Genet. 1999
Aug;65(2):318-26. doi: 10.1086/302492. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Sacksteder KA, Morrell JC, Wanders RJ, Matalon R, Gould SJ. MCD encodes
peroxisomal and cytoplasmic forms of malonyl-CoA decarboxylase and is mutated in
malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency. J Biol Chem. 1999 Aug 27;274(35):24461-8.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.35.24461. Citation on PubMed Salomons GS, Jakobs C, Pope LL, Errami A, Potter M, Nowaczyk M, Olpin S,
Manning N, Raiman JA, Slade T, Champion MP, Peck D, Gavrilov D, Hillman R,
Hoganson GE, Donaldson K, Shield JP, Ketteridge D, Wasserstein M, Gibson KM.
Clinical, enzymatic and molecular characterization of nine new patients with
malonyl-coenzyme A decarboxylase deficiency. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2007
Feb;30(1):23-8. doi: 10.1007/s10545-006-0514-6. Epub 2006 Dec 20. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Brain Disorders Genetic Disorders Lipid Metabolism Disorders Newborn Screening MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated January 1, 2010