Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/marinesco-sjogren-syndrome/ Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome is a condition that has a variety of signs and symptoms affecting many tissues.  People with Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome have clouding of the lens of the eyes ( cataracts ) that usually develops soon after birth or in early childhood.  Affected individuals also have muscle weakness (myopathy) and difficulty coordinating movements (ataxia), which may impair their ability to walk.  People with Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome may experience further decline in muscle function later in life. Most people with Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome have mild to moderate intellectual disability.  They also have skeletal abnormalities including short stature and a spine that curves to the side ( scoliosis ).  Other features of Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome include eyes that do not look in the same direction (strabismus), involuntary eye movements (nystagmus), and impaired speech (dysarthria). Affected individuals may have hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, which affects the production of hormones that direct sexual development.  As a result, puberty is either delayed or absent. Frequency Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome appears to be a rare condition.  More than 100 cases have been reported worldwide. Causes Mutations in the SIL1 gene cause Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome.  The SIL1 gene provides instructions for producing a protein located in a cell structure called the endoplasmic reticulum . Among its many functions, the endoplasmic reticulum folds and modifies newly formed proteins so they have the correct 3-dimensional shape.  The SIL1 protein plays a role in the process of protein folding . SIL1 gene mutations result in the production of a protein that has little or no activity.  A lack of SIL1 protein is thought to impair protein folding, which could disrupt protein transport and cause proteins to accumulate in the endoplasmic reticulum.  This accumulation likely damages and destroys cells in many different tissues, leading to ataxia, myopathy, and the other features of Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome. Approximately one-third of people with Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome do not have identified mutations in the SIL1 gene.  In these cases, the cause of the condition is unknown. Learn more about the gene associated with Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome SIL1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Garland-Moorhouse syndrome Hereditary oligophrenic cerebello-lental degeneration Marinesco-Garland syndrome MSS Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MARINESCO-SJOGREN SYNDROME; MSS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Anttonen AK, Mahjneh I, Hamalainen RH, Lagier-Tourenne C, Kopra O, Waris L,
Anttonen M, Joensuu T, Kalimo H, Paetau A, Tranebjaerg L, Chaigne D, Koenig M,
Eeg-Olofsson O, Udd B, Somer M, Somer H, Lehesjoki AE. The gene disrupted in
Marinesco-Sjogren syndrome encodes SIL1, an HSPA5 cochaperone. Nat Genet. 2005
Dec;37(12):1309-11. doi: 10.1038/ng1677. Epub 2005 Nov 13. Citation on PubMed Eriguchi M, Mizuta H, Kurohara K, Fujitake J, Kuroda Y. Identification of a
new homozygous frameshift insertion mutation in the SIL1 gene in 3 Japanese
patients with Marinesco-Sjogren syndrome. J Neurol Sci. 2008 Jul
15;270(1-2):197-200. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2008.02.012. Epub 2008 Apr 18. Citation on PubMed Ezgu F, Krejci P, Li S, de Sousa C, Graham JM Jr, Hansmann I, He W, Porpora K,
Wand D, Wertelecki W, Schneider A, Wilcox WR. Phenotype-genotype correlations in
patients with Marinesco-Sjogren syndrome. Clin Genet. 2014 Jul;86(1):74-84. doi:
10.1111/cge.12230. Epub 2013 Jul 30. Citation on PubMed Goto M, Okada M, Komaki H, Sugai K, Sasaki M, Noguchi S, Nonaka I, Nishino I,
Hayashi YK. A nationwide survey on Marinesco-Sjogren syndrome in Japan. Orphanet
J Rare Dis. 2014 Apr 23;9:58. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-9-58. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Krieger M, Roos A, Stendel C, Claeys KG, Sonmez FM, Baudis M, Bauer P,
Bornemann A, de Goede C, Dufke A, Finkel RS, Goebel HH, Haussler M, Kingston H,
Kirschner J, Medne L, Muschke P, Rivier F, Rudnik-Schoneborn S, Spengler S,
Inzana F, Stanzial F, Benedicenti F, Synofzik M, Lia Taratuto A, Pirra L, Tay SK,
Topaloglu H, Uyanik G, Wand D, Williams D, Zerres K, Weis J, Senderek J. SIL1
mutations and clinical spectrum in patients with Marinesco-Sjogren syndrome.
Brain. 2013 Dec;136(Pt 12):3634-44. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt283. Epub 2013 Oct 30. Citation on PubMed Senderek J, Krieger M, Stendel C, Bergmann C, Moser M, Breitbach-Faller N,
Rudnik-Schoneborn S, Blaschek A, Wolf NI, Harting I, North K, Smith J, Muntoni F,
Brockington M, Quijano-Roy S, Renault F, Herrmann R, Hendershot LM, Schroder JM,
Lochmuller H, Topaloglu H, Voit T, Weis J, Ebinger F, Zerres K. Mutations in SIL1
cause Marinesco-Sjogren syndrome, a cerebellar ataxia with cataract and myopathy.
Nat Genet. 2005 Dec;37(12):1312-4. doi: 10.1038/ng1678. Epub 2005 Nov 13. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Degenerative Nerve Diseases Genetic Disorders Movement Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Congenital cataract Genetics Hypogonadism Muscle atrophy Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2015