Autosomal recessive primary microcephaly: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Autosomal recessive primary microcephaly URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/autosomal-recessive-primary-microcephaly/ Autosomal recessive primary microcephaly To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Autosomal recessive primary microcephaly (often shortened to MCPH, which stands for "microcephaly primary hereditary") is a condition in which infants are born with a very small head and a small brain. The term "microcephaly" comes from the Greek words for "small head." Infants with MCPH have an unusually small head circumference compared to other infants of the same sex and age. Head circumference is the distance around the widest part of the head, measured by placing a measuring tape above the eyebrows and ears and around the back of the head. Affected infants' brain volume is also smaller than usual, although they usually do not have any major abnormalities in the structure of the brain . The head and brain grow throughout childhood and adolescence, but they continue to be much smaller than normal. MCPH causes intellectual disability, which is typically mild to moderate and does not become more severe with age. Most affected individuals have delayed speech and language skills. Motor skills, such as sitting, standing, and walking, may also be mildly delayed. People with MCPH usually have few or no other features associated with the condition. Some have a narrow, sloping forehead; mild seizures; problems with attention or behavior; or short stature compared to others in their family. The condition typically does not affect any other major organ systems or cause other health problems. Frequency The prevalence of all forms of microcephaly that are present from birth (primary microcephaly) ranges from 1 in 30,000 to 1 in 250,000 newborns worldwide. About 200 families with MCPH have been reported in the medical literature. This condition is more common in several specific populations, such as in northern Pakistan, where it affects an estimated 1 in 10,000 newborns. Causes MCPH can result from mutations in at least seven genes. Mutations in the ASPM gene are the most common cause of the disorder, accounting for about half of all cases. The genes associated with MCPH play important roles in early brain development, particularly in determining brain size. Studies suggest that the proteins produced from many of these genes help regulate cell division in the developing brain. Mutations in any of the genes associated with MCPH impair early brain development. As a result, affected infants have fewer nerve cells ( neurons ) than normal and are born with an unusually small brain. The reduced brain size underlies the small head size, intellectual disability, and developmental delays seen in many affected individuals. Learn more about the gene associated with Autosomal recessive primary microcephaly ASPM Additional Information from NCBI Gene: CDK5RAP2 CENPJ CEP152 KNL1 MCPH1 STIL WDR62 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition MCPH Microcephaly primary hereditary Primary autosomal recessive microcephaly True microcephaly Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Microcephaly 1, primary, autosomal recessive Genetic Testing Registry: Microcephaly 2, primary, autosomal recessive, with or without cortical malformations Genetic Testing Registry: Microcephaly 3, primary, autosomal recessive Genetic Testing Registry: Microcephaly 4, primary, autosomal recessive Genetic Testing Registry: Microcephaly 5, primary, autosomal recessive Genetic Testing Registry: Microcephaly 6, primary, autosomal recessive Genetic Testing Registry: Microcephaly 7, primary, autosomal recessive Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Autosomal recessive primary microcephaly Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MICROCEPHALY 1, PRIMARY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE; MCPH1 MICROCEPHALY 2, PRIMARY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, WITH OR WITHOUT CORTICAL MALFORMATIONS; MCPH2 MICROCEPHALY 4, PRIMARY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE; MCPH4 MICROCEPHALY 3, PRIMARY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE; MCPH3 MICROCEPHALY 6, PRIMARY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE; MCPH6 MICROCEPHALY 5, PRIMARY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE; MCPH5 MICROCEPHALY 7, PRIMARY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE; MCPH7 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Cox J, Jackson AP, Bond J, Woods CG. What primary microcephaly can tell us
about brain growth. Trends Mol Med. 2006 Aug;12(8):358-66. doi:
10.1016/j.molmed.2006.06.006. Epub 2006 Jul 10. Citation on PubMed Kaindl AM, Passemard S, Kumar P, Kraemer N, Issa L, Zwirner A, Gerard B,
Verloes A, Mani S, Gressens P. Many roads lead to primary autosomal recessive
microcephaly. Prog Neurobiol. 2010 Mar;90(3):363-83. doi:
10.1016/j.pneurobio.2009.11.002. Epub 2009 Dec 2. Citation on PubMed Passemard S, Titomanlio L, Elmaleh M, Afenjar A, Alessandri JL, Andria G, de
Villemeur TB, Boespflug-Tanguy O, Burglen L, Del Giudice E, Guimiot F, Hyon C,
Isidor B, Megarbane A, Moog U, Odent S, Hernandez K, Pouvreau N, Scala I, Schaer
M, Gressens P, Gerard B, Verloes A. Expanding the clinical and neuroradiologic
phenotype of primary microcephaly due to ASPM mutations. Neurology. 2009 Sep
22;73(12):962-9. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181b8799a. Citation on PubMed Roberts E, Hampshire DJ, Pattison L, Springell K, Jafri H, Corry P, Mannon J,
Rashid Y, Crow Y, Bond J, Woods CG. Autosomal recessive primary microcephaly: an
analysis of locus heterogeneity and phenotypic variation. J Med Genet. 2002
Oct;39(10):718-21. doi: 10.1136/jmg.39.10.718. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Thornton GK, Woods CG. Primary microcephaly: do all roads lead to Rome? Trends
Genet. 2009 Nov;25(11):501-10. doi: 10.1016/j.tig.2009.09.011. Epub 2009 Oct 21. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Verloes A, Drunat S, Passemard S. ASPM Primary Microcephaly. 2020 Apr
2. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington,
Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK555474/ Citation on PubMed Woods CG, Bond J, Enard W. Autosomal recessive primary microcephaly (MCPH): a
review of clinical, molecular, and evolutionary findings. Am J Hum Genet. 2005
May;76(5):717-28. doi: 10.1086/429930. Epub 2005 Mar 31. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Brain Malformations Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Head circumference Microcephaly Microcephaly (Image) Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated April 1, 2011