Prekallikrein deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Prekallikrein deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/prekallikrein-deficiency/ Prekallikrein deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Prekallikrein deficiency is a blood condition that usually causes no health problems. In people with this condition, blood tests show a prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (PTT), a result that is typically associated with bleeding problems; however, bleeding problems generally do not occur in prekallikrein deficiency. The condition is usually discovered when blood tests are done for other reasons. A few people with prekallikrein deficiency have experienced health problems related to blood clotting such as heart attack, stroke, a clot in the deep veins of the arms or legs ( deep vein thrombosis ), nosebleeds, or excessive bleeding after surgery. However, these are common problems in the general population, and most affected individuals have other risk factors for developing them, so it is unclear whether their occurrence is related to prekallikrein deficiency. Frequency The prevalence of prekallikrein deficiency is unknown. Approximately 80 affected individuals in about 30 families have been described in the medical literature. Because prekallikrein deficiency usually does not cause any symptoms, researchers suspect that most people with the condition are never diagnosed. Causes Prekallikrein deficiency is caused by mutations in the KLKB1 gene, which provides instructions for making a protein called prekallikrein. This protein, when converted to an active form called plasma kallikrein in the blood, is involved in the early stages of blood clotting . Plasma kallikrein plays a role in a process called the intrinsic coagulation pathway (also called the contact activation pathway). This pathway turns on (activates) proteins that are needed later in the clotting process. Blood clots protect the body after an injury by sealing off damaged blood vessels and preventing further blood loss. The KLKB1 gene mutations that cause prekallikrein deficiency reduce or eliminate functional plasma kallikrein, which likely impairs the intrinsic coagulation pathway. Researchers suggest that this lack (deficiency) of functional plasma kallikrein protein does not generally cause any symptoms because another process called the extrinsic coagulation pathway (also known as the tissue factor pathway) can compensate for the impaired intrinsic coagulation pathway. Learn more about the gene associated with Prekallikrein deficiency KLKB1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Congenital prekallikrein deficiency Fletcher factor deficiency Fletcher trait PKK deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Prekallikrein deficiency Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Congenital prekallikrein deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PREKALLIKREIN DEFICIENCY; PKKD Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Francois D, Trigui N, Leterreux G, Flaujac C, Horellou MH, Mazaux L, Vignon D,
Conard J, de Mazancourt P. Severe prekallikrein deficiencies due to homozygous
C529Y mutations. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2007 Apr;18(3):283-6. doi:
10.1097/MBC.0b013e328010bcde. Citation on PubMed Girolami A, Allemand E, Bertozzi I, Candeo N, Marun S, Girolami B. Thrombotic
events in patients with congenital prekallikrein deficiency: a critical
evaluation of all reported cases. Acta Haematol. 2010;123(4):210-4. doi:
10.1159/000313361. Epub 2010 Apr 27. Citation on PubMed Girolami A, Scarparo P, Candeo N, Lombardi AM. Congenital prekallikrein
deficiency. Expert Rev Hematol. 2010 Dec;3(6):685-95. doi: 10.1586/ehm.10.69. Citation on PubMed Nakao T, Yamane T, Katagami T, Shiota M, Izumi Y, Samori T, Hino M, Iwao H.
Severe prekallikrein deficiency due to a homozygous Trp499Stop nonsense mutation.
Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2011 Jun;22(4):337-9. doi:
10.1097/MBC.0b013e3283444ddb. Citation on PubMed Quail MT. Prekallikrein deficiency. J Pediatr Oncol Nurs. 2013
Jul-Aug;30(4):198-204. doi: 10.1177/1043454213487436. Epub 2013 Apr 29. Citation on PubMed Wynne Jones D, Russell G, Allford SL, Burdon K, Hawkins GA, Bowden DW, Minaee
S, Mumford AD. Severe prekallikrein deficiency associated with homozygosity for
an Arg94Stop nonsense mutation. Br J Haematol. 2004 Oct;127(2):220-3. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2141.2004.05180.x. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Bleeding Disorders Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Related Medical Tests Partial Thromboplastin Time (PTT) Test Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated July 1, 2014