Winchester syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Winchester syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/winchester-syndrome/ Winchester syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Winchester syndrome is a rare inherited disease characterized by a loss of bone tissue (osteolysis), particularly in the hands and feet. Winchester syndrome used to be considered part of a related condition now called multicentric osteolysis, nodulosis, and arthropathy (MONA). However, because Winchester syndrome and MONA are caused by mutations in different genes, they are now thought to be separate disorders. In most cases of Winchester syndrome, bone loss begins in the hands and feet, causing pain and limiting movement. Bone abnormalities later spread to other parts of the body, with joint problems (arthropathy) occurring in the elbows, shoulders, knees, hips, and spine. Most people with Winchester syndrome develop low bone mineral density (osteopenia) and thinning of the bones ( osteoporosis ) throughout the skeleton. These abnormalities make bones brittle and more prone to fracture. The bone abnormalities also lead to short stature. Some people with Winchester syndrome have skin abnormalities including patches of dark, thick, and leathery skin. Other features of the condition can include clouding of the clear front covering of the eye (corneal opacity), excess hair growth (hypertrichosis), overgrowth of the gums , heart abnormalities, and distinctive facial features that are described as " coarse ." Frequency Winchester syndrome is a rare condition whose prevalence is unknown. It has been reported in only a few individuals worldwide. Causes Winchester syndrome is caused by mutations in the MMP14 gene (also known as MT1-MMP ). This gene provides instructions for making a protein called matrix metallopeptidase 14, which is found on the surface of cells. Matrix metallopeptidase 14 normally helps modify and break down various components of the extracellular matrix, which is the intricate lattice of proteins and other molecules that forms in the spaces between cells. These changes influence many cell activities and functions, including promoting cell growth and  stimulating cell movement (migration). Matrix metallopeptidase 14 also turns on (activates) a protein called matrix metallopeptidase 2. The activity of matrix metallopeptidase 2 appears to be important for a variety of body functions, including bone remodeling, which is a normal process in which old bone is broken down and new bone is created to replace it. Mutations in the MMP14 gene alter matrix metallopeptidase 14 so that less of the enzyme is able to reach the cell surface. As a result, not enough of the enzyme is available to break down components of the extracellular matrix and activate matrix metallopeptidase 2. It is unclear how a shortage of this enzyme leads to the signs and symptoms of Winchester syndrome. It is possible that a loss of matrix metallopeptidase 2 activation somehow disrupts the balance of new bone creation and the breakdown of existing bone during bone remodeling, causing a progressive loss of bone tissue. How a reduced amount of matrix metallopeptidase 14 leads to the other features of Winchester syndrome is unknown. Learn more about the gene associated with Winchester syndrome MMP14 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Winchester disease WNCHRS Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Winchester syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Winchester syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM WINCHESTER SYNDROME; WNCHRS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Evans BR, Mosig RA, Lobl M, Martignetti CR, Camacho C, Grum-Tokars V,
Glucksman MJ, Martignetti JA. Mutation of membrane type-1 metalloproteinase,
MT1-MMP, causes the multicentric osteolysis and arthritis disease Winchester
syndrome. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Sep 7;91(3):572-6. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.07.022. Epub 2012 Aug 23. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Itoh Y, Seiki M. MT1-MMP: a potent modifier of pericellular microenvironment.
J Cell Physiol. 2006 Jan;206(1):1-8. doi: 10.1002/jcp.20431. Citation on PubMed Zankl A, Pachman L, Poznanski A, Bonafe L, Wang F, Shusterman Y, Fishman DA,
Superti-Furga A. Torg syndrome is caused by inactivating mutations in MMP2 and is
allelic to NAO and Winchester syndrome. J Bone Miner Res. 2007 Feb;22(2):329-33.
doi: 10.1359/jbmr.061013. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Bone Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 1, 2013