Ataxia with vitamin E deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Ataxia with vitamin E deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/ataxia-with-vitamin-e-deficiency/ Ataxia with vitamin E deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Ataxia with vitamin E deficiency is a disorder that impairs the body's ability to use vitamin E obtained from the diet. Vitamin E is an antioxidant, which means that it protects cells in the body from the damaging effects of unstable molecules called free radicals. A shortage (deficiency) of vitamin E can lead to neurological problems, such as difficulty coordinating movements (ataxia) and speech (dysarthria), loss of reflexes in the legs (lower limb areflexia), and a loss of sensation in the extremities (peripheral neuropathy). Some people with this condition have developed an eye disorder called retinitis pigmentosa that causes vision loss. Most people who have ataxia with vitamin E deficiency start to experience problems with movement between the ages of 5 and 15 years.  The movement problems tend to worsen with age. Frequency Ataxia with vitamin E deficiency is a rare condition; however, its prevalence is unknown. Causes Mutations in the TTPA gene cause ataxia with vitamin E deficiency. The TTPA gene provides instructions for making the α-tocopherol transfer protein (αTTP), which is found in the liver and brain. This protein controls distribution of vitamin E obtained from the diet (also called α-tocopherol) to cells and tissues throughout the body. Vitamin E helps cells prevent damage that might be done by free radicals. TTPA gene mutations impair the activity of the αTTP protein, resulting in an inability to retain and use dietary vitamin E. As a result, vitamin E levels in the blood are greatly reduced and free radicals accumulate within cells. Nerve cells ( neurons ) in the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system) are particularly vulnerable to the damaging effects of free radicals and these cells die off when they are deprived of vitamin E. Nerve cell damage can lead to problems with movement and other features of ataxia with vitamin E deficiency. Learn more about the gene associated with Ataxia with vitamin E deficiency TTPA Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Ataxia with isolated vitamin E deficiency AVED Familial isolated vitamin E deficiency FIVE Friedreich ataxia phenotype with selective vitamin E deficiency Friedreich-like ataxia Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Familial isolated deficiency of vitamin E Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Ataxia with vitamin E deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM ATAXIA WITH VITAMIN E DEFICIENCY; AVED Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bromley D, Anderson PC, Daggett V. Structural consequences of mutations to the
alpha-tocopherol transfer protein associated with the neurodegenerative disease
ataxia with vitamin E deficiency. Biochemistry. 2013 Jun 18;52(24):4264-73. doi:
10.1021/bi4001084. Epub 2013 Jun 10. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Di Donato I, Bianchi S, Federico A. Ataxia with vitamin E deficiency: update
of molecular diagnosis. Neurol Sci. 2010 Aug;31(4):511-5. doi:
10.1007/s10072-010-0261-1. Epub 2010 May 13. Citation on PubMed El Euch-Fayache G, Bouhlal Y, Amouri R, Feki M, Hentati F. Molecular, clinical
and peripheral neuropathy study of Tunisian patients with ataxia with vitamin E
deficiency. Brain. 2014 Feb;137(Pt 2):402-10. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt339. Epub
2013 Dec 25. Citation on PubMed Mariotti C, Gellera C, Rimoldi M, Mineri R, Uziel G, Zorzi G, Pareyson D,
Piccolo G, Gambi D, Piacentini S, Squitieri F, Capra R, Castellotti B, Di Donato
S. Ataxia with isolated vitamin E deficiency: neurological phenotype, clinical
follow-up and novel mutations in TTPA gene in Italian families. Neurol Sci. 2004
Jul;25(3):130-7. doi: 10.1007/s10072-004-0246-z. Citation on PubMed Pang J, Kiyosawa M, Seko Y, Yokota T, Harino S, Suzuki J. Clinicopathological
report of retinitis pigmentosa with vitamin E deficiency caused by mutation of
the alpha-tocopherol transfer protein gene. Jpn J Ophthalmol. 2001
Nov-Dec;45(6):672-6. doi: 10.1016/s0021-5155(01)00425-7. Citation on PubMed Qian J, Atkinson J, Manor D. Biochemical consequences of heritable mutations
in the alpha-tocopherol transfer protein. Biochemistry. 2006 Jul
11;45(27):8236-42. doi: 10.1021/bi060522c. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Movement Disorders Neuromuscular Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Retinitis pigmentosa Vitamin E Related Medical Tests Vitamin E (Tocopherol) Test Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 1, 2015