Retinal arterial macroaneurysm with supravalvular pulmonic stenosis: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Retinal arterial macroaneurysm with supravalvular pulmonic stenosis URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/retinal-arterial-macroaneurysm-with-supravalvular-pulmonic-stenosis/ Retinal arterial macroaneurysm with supravalvular pulmonic stenosis To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Retinal arterial macroaneurysm with supravalvular pulmonic stenosis (RAMSVPS) is a disorder that affects blood vessels in the eyes and heart . The condition generally becomes apparent in infancy or childhood. RAMSVPS damages the arteries in the light-sensitive tissue at the back of the eye (the retina) . These arteries gradually develop multiple small bulges called beading. Eventually, larger bulges in the blood vessel walls (macroaneurysms) occur. These macroaneurysms can tear (rupture), leading to bleeding that can spread into other areas of the eye and cause vision loss. People with RAMSVPS also have a heart condition called supravalvular pulmonic stenosis. Pulmonic stenosis is a narrowing that affects the pulmonic valve between the heart and the lungs. The term "supravalvular" means that the narrowing occurs just above the valve, in a blood vessel called the pulmonary artery. Supravalvular pulmonic stenosis impairs blood flow into the lungs, where blood normally picks up oxygen for distribution to cells and tissues throughout the body. As a result, less oxygen is carried through the bloodstream, leading to signs and symptoms that include shortness of breath; a rapid heartbeat; fatigue; and swelling in the face, feet, or abdomen. Frequency RAMSVPS is a rare disorder. Only a small number of affected individuals and families, all from Saudi Arabia, have been described in the medical literature. Causes RAMSVPS is caused by a mutation in the IGFBP7 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 7 (IGFBP7). The IGFBP7 protein is active in the lining of blood vessels (the vascular endothelium ). It is thought to help stop a pathway called BRAF signaling, which is involved in directing cell growth. The IGFBP7 gene mutation that causes RAMSVPS results in an abnormally short IGFBP7 protein that does not function properly. Without normally functioning IGFBP7 protein to control BRAF signaling, this signaling is increased. It is unknown how this increase is related to the specific blood vessel abnormalities that occur in RAMSVPS, or why these abnormalities are confined to the eyes and the pulmonary artery. Researchers suggest that differences in normal levels of IGFBP7 protein in various parts of the body or the presence of other proteins with a similar function in different tissues may account for the specific signs and symptoms of this disorder. Learn more about the gene associated with Retinal arterial macroaneurysm with supravalvular pulmonic stenosis IGFBP7 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Familial retinal arterial macroaneurysm FRAM RAMSVPS Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Familial retinal arterial macroaneurysm Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Familial retinal arterial macroaneurysm Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM RETINAL ARTERIAL MACROANEURYSM WITH SUPRAVALVULAR PULMONIC STENOSIS; RAMSVPS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Abu-Safieh L, Abboud EB, Alkuraya H, Shamseldin H, Al-Enzi S, Al-Abdi L,
Hashem M, Colak D, Jarallah A, Ahmad H, Bobis S, Nemer G, Bitar F, Alkuraya FS.
Mutation of IGFBP7 causes upregulation of BRAF/MEK/ERK pathway and familial
retinal arterial macroaneurysms. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Aug 12;89(2):313-9. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.07.010. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Dhindsa HS, Abboud EB. Familial retinal arterial macroaneurysms. Retina. 2002
Oct;22(5):607-15. doi: 10.1097/00006982-200210000-00012. Citation on PubMed Hooper AT, Shmelkov SV, Gupta S, Milde T, Bambino K, Gillen K, Goetz M,
Chavala S, Baljevic M, Murphy AJ, Valenzuela DM, Gale NW, Thurston G, Yancopoulos
GD, Vahdat L, Evans T, Rafii S. Angiomodulin is a specific marker of vasculature
and regulates vascular endothelial growth factor-A-dependent neoangiogenesis.
Circ Res. 2009 Jul 17;105(2):201-8. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.196790. Epub 2009
Jun 18. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Retinal Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Fluorescein angiography Genetics Pulmonic valve stenosis Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2015