Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/hereditary-neuropathy-with-liability-to-pressure-palsies/ Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies is a disorder that affects peripheral nerves. These nerves connect the brain and spinal cord to muscles and sensory cells that detect touch, pain, and temperature. In people with this disorder, the peripheral nerves are unusually sensitive to pressure, such as the pressure that occurs when carrying heavy grocery bags, leaning on an elbow, or sitting without changing position, particularly with crossed legs. These activities would not normally cause sensation problems in people without the disorder. Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies is characterized by recurrent episodes of numbness, tingling, and loss of muscle function (palsy) in the region associated with the affected nerve, usually an arm, hand, leg, or foot. An episode can last from several minutes to several months, but recovery is usually complete. Repeated incidents, however, can cause permanent muscle weakness or loss of sensation. This disorder is also associated with pain in the limbs, especially the hands. A pressure palsy episode results from pressure on a single nerve, and any peripheral nerve can be affected. Although episodes often recur, they can affect different nerves. The most common problem sites involve nerves in the wrists, elbows, and knees. The fingers, shoulders, hands, feet, and scalp can also be affected. Many people with this disorder experience carpal tunnel syndrome , which occurs when a nerve in the wrist (the median nerve) is involved. Carpal tunnel syndrome is characterized by numbness, tingling, and weakness in the hand and fingers. An episode in the hand may affect fine motor activities such as writing, opening jars, and fastening buttons. An episode of nerve compression in the knee can lead to a condition called foot drop, which makes walking, climbing stairs, or driving difficult or impossible. The symptoms of hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies usually begin during adolescence or early adulthood but may develop anytime from childhood to late adulthood. Symptoms vary in severity; many people never realize they have the disorder, while some people experience prolonged disability. Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies does not affect life expectancy. Frequency Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies is estimated to occur in 2 to 5 per 100,000 individuals. Causes Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies is most commonly caused by the deletion of one copy of the PMP22 gene. This loss reduces the amount of PMP22 protein produced. Other PMP22 gene mutations that lead to a reduction of PMP22 protein can also cause the condition. The PMP22 protein is a component of myelin , a protective substance that covers nerves and promotes the efficient transmission of nerve impulses. Studies suggest that the PMP22 protein is particularly important in protecting nerves from physical pressure, helping them restore their structure after compression. Compression can interrupt nerve signaling, leading to the sensation commonly referred to as a limb "falling asleep." The ability of nerves to recover from normal, day-to-day pressure, for example when sitting for long periods, keeps the limbs from constantly losing sensation. The consequences of PMP22 gene mutations are not clearly understood. A shortage of PMP22 protein appears to make nerves less able to recover from compression, which impairs the transmission of nerve impulses, causing the signs and symptoms of hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies. Learn more about the gene associated with Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies PMP22 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition Compression neuropathy Entrapment neuropathy Familial pressure sensitive neuropathy Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy Hereditary pressure sensitive neuropathy HNPP Inherited tendency to pressure palsies Tomaculous neuropathy Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary liability to pressure palsies Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM NEUROPATHY, HEREDITARY, WITH LIABILITY TO PRESSURE PALSIES; HNPP Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bai Y, Zhang X, Katona I, Saporta MA, Shy ME, O'Malley HA, Isom LL, Suter U,
Li J. Conduction block in PMP22 deficiency. J Neurosci. 2010 Jan 13;30(2):600-8.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4264-09.2010. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Chance PF. Genetic evaluation of inherited motor/sensory neuropathy. Suppl
Clin Neurophysiol. 2004;57:228-42. doi: 10.1016/s1567-424x(09)70360-5. Citation on PubMed Chance PF. Inherited focal, episodic neuropathies: hereditary neuropathy with
liability to pressure palsies and hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy. Neuromolecular
Med. 2006;8(1-2):159-74. doi: 10.1385/NMM:8:1:159. Citation on PubMed Chrestian N. Hereditary Neuropathy with Liability to Pressure Palsies. 1998
Sep 28 [updated 2020 Aug 27]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA,
Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA):
University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1392/ Citation on PubMed Guo J, Wang L, Zhang Y, Wu J, Arpag S, Hu B, Imhof BA, Tian X, Carter BD,
Suter U, Li J. Abnormal junctions and permeability of myelin in PMP22-deficient
nerves. Ann Neurol. 2014 Feb;75(2):255-65. doi: 10.1002/ana.24086. Epub 2014 Feb
20. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Li J, Krajewski K, Lewis RA, Shy ME. Loss-of-function phenotype of hereditary
neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies. Muscle Nerve. 2004
Feb;29(2):205-10. doi: 10.1002/mus.10521. Citation on PubMed Potulska-Chromik A, Sinkiewicz-Darol E, Ryniewicz B, Lipowska M, Kabzinska D,
Kochanski A, Kostera-Pruszczyk A. Clinical, electrophysiological, and molecular
findings in early onset hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsy.
Muscle Nerve. 2014 Dec;50(6):914-8. doi: 10.1002/mus.24250. Epub 2014 Oct 30. Citation on PubMed Rosso G, Liashkovich I, Gess B, Young P, Kun A, Shahin V. Unravelling crucial
biomechanical resilience of myelinated peripheral nerve fibres provided by the
Schwann cell basal lamina and PMP22. Sci Rep. 2014 Dec 2;4:7286. doi:
10.1038/srep07286. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central van de Wetering RA, Gabreels-Festen AA, Timmerman V, Padberg GM, Gabreels FJ,
Mariman EC. Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies with a small
deletion interrupting the PMP22 gene. Neuromuscul Disord. 2002 Oct;12(7-8):651-5.
doi: 10.1016/s0960-8966(02)00025-1. Citation on PubMed Yilmaz U, Bird TT, Carter GT, Wang LH, Weiss MD. Pain in hereditary neuropathy
with liability to pressure palsy: an association with fibromyalgia syndrome?
Muscle Nerve. 2015 Mar;51(3):385-90. doi: 10.1002/mus.24331. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Carpal Tunnel Syndrome Genetic Disorders Peripheral Nerve Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Carpal tunnel syndrome Genetics Peripheral neuropathy Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated July 1, 2016