Eosinophil peroxidase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Eosinophil peroxidase deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/eosinophil-peroxidase-deficiency/ Eosinophil peroxidase deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Eosinophil peroxidase deficiency is a condition that affects certain white blood cells called eosinophils but causes no health problems in affected individuals. Eosinophils aid in the body's immune response. During a normal immune response, these cells are turned on (activated), and they travel to the area of injury or inflammation . The cells then release proteins and other compounds that have a toxic effect on severely damaged cells or invading organisms. One of these proteins is called eosinophil peroxidase. In eosinophil peroxidase deficiency, eosinophils have little or no eosinophil peroxidase. A lack of this protein does not seem to affect the eosinophils' ability to carry out an immune response. Because eosinophil peroxidase deficiency does not cause any health problems, this condition is often diagnosed when blood tests are done for other reasons or when a family member has been diagnosed with the condition. Frequency Approximately 100 individuals with eosinophil peroxidase deficiency have been described in the scientific literature. Based on blood test data, varying estimates of the prevalence of the condition have been reported in specific populations. Eosinophil peroxidase deficiency is estimated to occur in 8.6 in 1,000 Yemenite Jews, in 3 in 1,000 North-African Jews, and in 1 in 1,000 Iraqi Jews. In northeastern Italy, the condition occurs in approximately 1 in 14,000 individuals; in Japan it occurs in 1 in 36,000 people; and in Luxembourg, eosinophil peroxidase deficiency is thought to occur in 1 in 100,000 people. Causes Mutations in the EPX gene cause eosinophil peroxidase deficiency. The EPX gene provides instructions for making the eosinophil peroxidase protein. During an immune response, activated eosinophils release eosinophil peroxidase at the site of injury. This protein helps form molecules that are highly toxic to bacteria and parasites. These toxic molecules also play a role in regulating inflammation by fighting microbial invaders. EPX gene mutations reduce or prevent eosinophil peroxidase production or result in a protein that is unstable and nonfunctional. As a result, eosinophils have severely reduced amounts of eosinophil peroxidase or none at all. Other proteins within affected eosinophils are normal, and while the cells lacking eosinophil peroxidase are smaller and may have structural changes, the loss of eosinophil peroxidase does not appear to impair the function of eosinophils. Learn more about the gene associated with Eosinophil peroxidase deficiency EPX Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition EPXD Peroxidase and phospholipid deficiency in eosinophils Presentey anomaly Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Eosinophil peroxidase deficiency Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Eosinophil peroxidase deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM EOSINOPHIL PEROXIDASE DEFICIENCY; EPXD Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Kutter D, Mueller-Hagedorn S, Forges T, Glaesener R. A case of eosinophil
peroxidase deficiency. Ann Hematol. 1995 Dec;71(6):315-7. doi:
10.1007/BF01697987. Citation on PubMed Nakagawa T, Ikemoto T, Takeuchi T, Tanaka K, Tanigawa N, Yamamoto D, Shimizu
A. Eosinophilic peroxidase deficiency: Identification of a point mutation (D648N)
and prediction of structural changes. Hum Mutat. 2001 Mar;17(3):235-6. doi:
10.1002/humu.10. Citation on PubMed Romano M, Patriarca P, Melo C, Baralle FE, Dri P. Hereditary eosinophil
peroxidase deficiency: immunochemical and spectroscopic studies and evidence for
a compound heterozygosity of the defect. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Dec
20;91(26):12496-500. doi: 10.1073/pnas.91.26.12496. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Zabucchi G, Soranzo MR, Menegazzi R, Vecchio M, Knowles A, Piccinini C,
Spessotto P, Patriarca P. Eosinophil peroxidase deficiency: morphological and
immunocytochemical studies of the eosinophil-specific granules. Blood. 1992 Dec
1;80(11):2903-10. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Eosinophilic Disorders Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 1, 2014