Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with metatarsal shortening: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with metatarsal shortening URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/spondyloepiphyseal-dysplasia-with-metatarsal-shortening/ Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with metatarsal shortening To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia (SED) with metatarsal shortening (formerly called Czech dysplasia) is an inherited condition that affects joint function and bone development. People with this condition have joint pain that begins in late childhood or adolescence. The cartilage in their hips, knees, shoulders, and spine usually degenerates over time ( osteoarthritis ), which may impair their mobility. Due to these severe joint problems, people with SED with metatarsal shortening may require joint replacement in early adulthood. People with SED with metatarsal shortening often have shortened bones in their third and fourth toes, which make their first two toes appear unusually long. Affected individuals may also have abnormalities in the bones of the spine (vertebrae), including flattened vertebrae (platyspondyly), a reduction in the space between the vertebrae, or an abnormal curvature of the spine. Some people with SED with metatarsal shortening have progressive hearing loss. Frequency SED with metatarsal shortening is rare; as of 2020, fewer than 15 families have been reported with this condition. Causes SED with metatarsal shortening is caused by a particular variant (also called a mutation) in the COL2A1 gene.  The COL2A1 gene provides instructions for making a protein that forms type II collagen, which is found in the clear gel that fills the eyeball ( the vitreous ) and in cartilage. Cartilage makes up much of the skeleton during early development. Most cartilage is later replaced by bone, except for the cartilage that continues to cover and protect the ends of bones and the cartilage that is present in the nose and external ears. Type II collagen is essential for the normal growth and development of bones and other connective tissues. The variant that causes SED with metatarsal shortening replaces one protein building block (amino acid) known as arginine in the COL2A1 protein with another amino acid known as cysteine. This interferes with the assembly of type II collagen molecules, which prevents bones and other connective tissues from developing properly. Learn more about the gene associated with Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with metatarsal shortening COL2A1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition Czech dysplasia, metatarsal type Progressive pseudorheumatoid dysplasia with hypoplastic toes SED with metatarsal shortening SED with metatarsal shortening, COL2A1-related Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with precocious osteoarthritis Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with metatarsal shortening Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with metatarsal shortening Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CZECH DYSPLASIA Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Burrage LC, Lu JT, Liu DS, Moss TJ, Gibbs R, Schlesinger AE, Bacino CA,
Campeau PM, Lee BH. Early childhood presentation of Czech dysplasia. Clin
Dysmorphol. 2013 Apr;22(2):76-80. doi: 10.1097/MCD.0b013e32835fff39. Citation on PubMed Gregersen PA, Savarirayan R. Type II Collagen Disorders Overview. 2019 Apr 25
[updated 2024 Oct 24]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE,
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University
of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK540447/ Citation on PubMed Hoornaert KP, Marik I, Kozlowski K, Cole T, Le Merrer M, Leroy JG, Coucke PJ,
Sillence D, Mortier GR. Czech dysplasia metatarsal type: another type II collagen
disorder. Eur J Hum Genet. 2007 Dec;15(12):1269-75. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201913.
Epub 2007 Aug 29. Citation on PubMed Kozlowski K, Marik I, Marikova O, Zemkova D, Kuklik M. Czech dysplasia
metatarsal type. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Aug 15;129A(1):87-91. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.30132. Citation on PubMed Marik I, Marikova O, Zemkova D, Kuklik M, Kozlowski K. Dominantly inherited
progressive pseudorheumatoid dysplasia with hypoplastic toes. Skeletal Radiol.
2004 Mar;33(3):157-64. doi: 10.1007/s00256-003-0708-z. Epub 2004 Jan 17. Citation on PubMed Tzschach A, Tinschert S, Kaminsky E, Lusga E, Mundlos S, Graul-Neumann LM.
Czech dysplasia: report of a large family and further delineation of the
phenotype. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Jul 15;146A(14):1859-64. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.32389. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Connective Tissue Disorders Genetic Disorders Osteoarthritis MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 19, 2024