Duane-radial ray syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Duane-radial ray syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/duane-radial-ray-syndrome/ Duane-radial ray syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Duane-radial ray syndrome is a disorder that affects the eyes and causes abnormalities of bones in the arms and hands. This condition is characterized by a particular problem with eye movement called Duane anomaly (also known as Duane syndrome). This abnormality results from the improper development of certain nerves that control eye movement. Duane anomaly limits outward eye movement (toward the ear), and in some cases may limit inward eye movement (toward the nose). Also, as the eye moves inward, the eye opening becomes narrower and the eyeball may pull back (retract) into its socket. Bone abnormalities in the hands include malformed or absent thumbs , an extra thumb, or a long thumb that looks like a finger . Partial or complete absence of bones in the forearm is also common. Together, these hand and arm abnormalities are known as radial ray malformations. People with the combination of Duane anomaly and radial ray malformations may have a variety of other signs and symptoms. These features include unusually shaped ears, hearing loss, heart and kidney defects, a distinctive facial appearance, an inward- and upward-turning foot ( clubfoot ), and fused spinal bones (vertebrae). The varied signs and symptoms of Duane-radial ray syndrome often overlap with features of other disorders. For example, acro-renal-ocular syndrome is characterized by Duane anomaly and other eye abnormalities, radial ray malformations, and kidney defects. Both conditions are caused by mutations in the same gene. Based on these similarities, researchers suspect that Duane-radial ray syndrome and acro-renal-ocular syndrome are part of an overlapping set of syndromes with many possible signs and symptoms. The features of Duane-radial ray syndrome are also similar to those of a condition called Holt-Oram syndrome ; however, these two disorders are caused by mutations in different genes. Frequency Duane-radial ray syndrome is a rare condition whose prevalence is unknown. Only a few affected families have been reported worldwide. Causes Duane-radial ray syndrome results from mutations in the SALL4 gene. This gene is part of a group of genes called the SALL family. SALL genes provide instructions for making proteins that are involved in the formation of tissues and organs before birth. The proteins produced from these genes act as transcription factors, which means they attach (bind) to specific regions of DNA and help control the activity of particular genes. The exact function of the SALL4 protein is unclear, although it appears to be important for the normal development of the eyes, heart, and limbs. Mutations in the SALL4 gene prevent cells from making any functional protein from one copy of the gene. It is unclear how a reduction in the amount of the SALL4 protein leads to Duane anomaly, radial ray malformations, and the other features of Duane-radial ray syndrome and similar conditions. Learn more about the gene associated with Duane-radial ray syndrome SALL4 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered SALL4 gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In many cases, an affected person inherits a mutation from one affected parent .  Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Other Names for This Condition DRRS Okihiro syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Duane-radial ray syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Okihiro syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM DUANE-RADIAL RAY SYNDROME; DRRS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Al-Baradie R, Yamada K, St Hilaire C, Chan WM, Andrews C, McIntosh N, Nakano
M, Martonyi EJ, Raymond WR, Okumura S, Okihiro MM, Engle EC. Duane radial ray
syndrome (Okihiro syndrome) maps to 20q13 and results from mutations in SALL4, a
new member of the SAL family. Am J Hum Genet. 2002 Nov;71(5):1195-9. doi:
10.1086/343821. Epub 2002 Oct 22. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Borozdin W, Boehm D, Leipoldt M, Wilhelm C, Reardon W, Clayton-Smith J, Becker
K, Muhlendyck H, Winter R, Giray O, Silan F, Kohlhase J. SALL4 deletions are a
common cause of Okihiro and acro-renal-ocular syndromes and confirm
haploinsufficiency as the pathogenic mechanism. J Med Genet. 2004 Sep;41(9):e113.
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2004.019901. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Borozdin W, Wright MJ, Hennekam RC, Hannibal MC, Crow YJ, Neumann TE, Kohlhase
J. Novel mutations in the gene SALL4 provide further evidence for
acro-renal-ocular and Okihiro syndromes being allelic entities, and extend the
phenotypic spectrum. J Med Genet. 2004 Aug;41(8):e102. doi:
10.1136/jmg.2004.019505. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Kohlhase J, Chitayat D, Kotzot D, Ceylaner S, Froster UG, Fuchs S, Montgomery
T, Rosler B. SALL4 mutations in Okihiro syndrome (Duane-radial ray syndrome),
acro-renal-ocular syndrome, and related disorders. Hum Mutat. 2005
Sep;26(3):176-83. doi: 10.1002/humu.20215. Citation on PubMed Kohlhase J, Heinrich M, Schubert L, Liebers M, Kispert A, Laccone F, Turnpenny
P, Winter RM, Reardon W. Okihiro syndrome is caused by SALL4 mutations. Hum Mol
Genet. 2002 Nov 1;11(23):2979-87. doi: 10.1093/hmg/11.23.2979. Citation on PubMed Kohlhase J, Schubert L, Liebers M, Rauch A, Becker K, Mohammed SN,
Newbury-Ecob R, Reardon W. Mutations at the SALL4 locus on chromosome 20 result
in a range of clinically overlapping phenotypes, including Okihiro syndrome,
Holt-Oram syndrome, acro-renal-ocular syndrome, and patients previously reported
to represent thalidomide embryopathy. J Med Genet. 2003 Jul;40(7):473-8. doi:
10.1136/jmg.40.7.473. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Kohlhase J. SALL4-Related Disorders. 2004 Aug 16 [updated 2022 Mar
17]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington,
Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1373/ Citation on PubMed Miertus J, Borozdin W, Frecer V, Tonini G, Bertok S, Amoroso A, Miertus S,
Kohlhase J. A SALL4 zinc finger missense mutation predicted to result in
increased DNA binding affinity is associated with cranial midline defects and
mild features of Okihiro syndrome. Hum Genet. 2006 Mar;119(1-2):154-61. doi:
10.1007/s00439-005-0124-7. Epub 2006 Jan 3. Citation on PubMed Terhal P, Rosler B, Kohlhase J. A family with features overlapping Okihiro
syndrome, hemifacial microsomia and isolated Duane anomaly caused by a novel
SALL4 mutation. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Feb 1;140(3):222-6. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.31060. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Eye Movement Disorders Genetic Disorders Hand Injuries and Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Skeletal limb abnormalities Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 1, 2009