Periventricular heterotopia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Periventricular heterotopia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/periventricular-heterotopia/ Periventricular heterotopia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Periventricular heterotopia is a condition in which nerve cells ( neurons ) do not migrate properly during the early development of the fetal brain, from about the 6th week to the 24th week of pregnancy. Heterotopia means "out of place." In normal brain development, neurons form in the periventricular region, located around fluid-filled cavities (ventricles) near the center of the brain. The neurons then migrate outward to form the exterior of the brain ( cerebral cortex ) in six onion-like layers. In periventricular heterotopia, some neurons fail to migrate to their proper position and form clumps around the ventricles. Periventricular heterotopia usually becomes evident when seizures first appear, often during the teenage years. The nodules around the ventricles are then typically discovered when magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies are done. Affected individuals usually have normal intelligence, although some have mild intellectual disability. Difficulty with reading and spelling (dyslexia) and movement problems have been reported in some people with periventricular heterotopia. Less commonly, individuals with periventricular heterotopia may have other features including more severe brain malformations, small head size ( microcephaly ), developmental delays, recurrent infections, blood vessel abnormalities, stomach problems, or lung disease. Periventricular heterotopia may also occur in association with other conditions such as Ehlers-Danlos syndrome , which results in extremely flexible joints, skin that stretches easily, and fragile blood vessels. Frequency Periventricular heterotopia is a rare condition. Its incidence is unknown. Causes In most cases, periventricular heterotopia is caused by mutations in the FLNA gene. This gene provides instructions for producing the protein filamin A, which helps build the network of protein filaments ( cytoskeleton ) that gives structure to cells and allows them to change shape and move. Certain mutations in the FLNA gene result in an impaired FLNA protein that cannot perform this function, disrupting the normal migration patterns of neurons during brain development. Periventricular heterotopia can also be caused by mutations in the ARFGEF2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is involved in the movement (trafficking) of small sac-like structures ( vesicles ) within the cell. Vesicle trafficking is important in controlling the migration of neurons during the development of the brain. Mutations in the ARFGEF2 gene may disrupt this function, which could result in the abnormal neuronal migration seen in periventricular heterotopia. Researchers believe that mutations in the FLNA or ARFGEF2 genes may also result in weakening of the attachments (adhesion) between cells that form the lining of the ventricles. A weakened ventricular lining could allow some neurons to form clumps around the ventricles while others migrate normally to the exterior of the brain, as seen in periventricular heterotopia. In a few cases, periventricular heterotopia has been associated with abnormalities in chromosome 5 . In each case, the affected individual had extra genetic material caused by an abnormal duplication of part of this chromosome. It is not known how this duplicated genetic material results in the signs and symptoms of periventricular heterotopia. Learn more about the genes and chromosome associated with Periventricular heterotopia ARFGEF2 FLNA chromosome 5 Additional Information from NCBI Gene: NEDD4L Inheritance Periventricular heterotopia can have different inheritance patterns. When this condition is caused by mutations in the FLNA gene, it is inherited in an X-linked dominant pattern . A condition is considered X-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes . The inheritance is dominant if one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons. In X-linked periventricular heterotopia, males experience much more severe symptoms of the disorder than females, and in most cases die before birth. In about 50 percent of cases of X-linked periventricular heterotopia, an affected person inherits the mutation from a mother who is also affected. Other cases may result from new mutations in the gene.  These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Periventricular heterotopia caused by mutations in the ARFGEF2 gene is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. Individuals with periventricular heterotopia in whom ARFGEF2 gene mutations have been identified have a severe form of the disorder, including microcephaly, severe developmental delay, and seizures beginning in infancy. Most often, the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Familial nodular heterotopia Periventricular nodular heterotopia Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Periventricular laminar heterotopia Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Periventricular nodular heterotopia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PERIVENTRICULAR NODULAR HETEROTOPIA 1; PVNH1 PERIVENTRICULAR HETEROTOPIA WITH MICROCEPHALY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE; ARPHM PERIVENTRICULAR NODULAR HETEROTOPIA 3; PVNH3 PERIVENTRICULAR NODULAR HETEROTOPIA 7; PVNH7 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Broix L, Jagline H, Ivanova E, Schmucker S, Drouot N, Clayton-Smith J,
Pagnamenta AT, Metcalfe KA, Isidor B, Louvier UW, Poduri A, Taylor JC, Tilly P,
Poirier K, Saillour Y, Lebrun N, Stemmelen T, Rudolf G, Muraca G, Saintpierre B,
Elmorjani A; Deciphering Developmental Disorders study; Moise M, Weirauch NB,
Guerrini R, Boland A, Olaso R, Masson C, Tripathy R, Keays D, Beldjord C, Nguyen
L, Godin J, Kini U, Nischke P, Deleuze JF, Bahi-Buisson N, Sumara I, Hinckelmann
MV, Chelly J. Mutations in the HECT domain of NEDD4L lead to AKT-mTOR pathway
deregulation and cause periventricular nodular heterotopia. Nat Genet. 2016
Nov;48(11):1349-1358. doi: 10.1038/ng.3676. Epub 2016 Oct 3. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Guerrini R, Parrini E. Neuronal migration disorders. Neurobiol Dis. 2010
May;38(2):154-66. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2009.02.008. Epub 2009 Feb 23. Citation on PubMed Liu JS. Molecular genetics of neuronal migration disorders. Curr Neurol
Neurosci Rep. 2011 Apr;11(2):171-8. doi: 10.1007/s11910-010-0176-5. Citation on PubMed LoTurco JJ, Bai J. The multipolar stage and disruptions in neuronal migration.
Trends Neurosci. 2006 Jul;29(7):407-413. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2006.05.006. Epub
2006 May 19. Citation on PubMed Lu J, Tiao G, Folkerth R, Hecht J, Walsh C, Sheen V. Overlapping expression of
ARFGEF2 and Filamin A in the neuroependymal lining of the lateral ventricles:
insights into the cause of periventricular heterotopia. J Comp Neurol. 2006 Jan
20;494(3):476-84. doi: 10.1002/cne.20806. Citation on PubMed Parrini E, Ramazzotti A, Dobyns WB, Mei D, Moro F, Veggiotti P, Marini C,
Brilstra EH, Dalla Bernardina B, Goodwin L, Bodell A, Jones MC, Nangeroni M,
Palmeri S, Said E, Sander JW, Striano P, Takahashi Y, Van Maldergem L, Leonardi
G, Wright M, Walsh CA, Guerrini R. Periventricular heterotopia: phenotypic
heterogeneity and correlation with Filamin A mutations. Brain. 2006 Jul;129(Pt
7):1892-906. doi: 10.1093/brain/awl125. Epub 2006 May 9. Citation on PubMed Sheen VL. Periventricular Heterotopia: Shuttling of Proteins through Vesicles
and Actin in Cortical Development and Disease. Scientifica (Cairo).
2012;2012:480129. doi: 10.6064/2012/480129. Epub 2012 Oct 22. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Spalice A, Parisi P, Nicita F, Pizzardi G, Del Balzo F, Iannetti P. Neuronal
migration disorders: clinical, neuroradiologic and genetics aspects. Acta
Paediatr. 2009 Mar;98(3):421-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1651-2227.2008.01160.x. Epub 2008
Dec 16. Citation on PubMed Verrotti A, Spalice A, Ursitti F, Papetti L, Mariani R, Castronovo A,
Mastrangelo M, Iannetti P. New trends in neuronal migration disorders. Eur J
Paediatr Neurol. 2010 Jan;14(1):1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2009.01.005. Epub 2009
Mar 4. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Brain Malformations Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2018