Autosomal recessive congenital methemoglobinemia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Autosomal recessive congenital methemoglobinemia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/autosomal-recessive-congenital-methemoglobinemia/ Autosomal recessive congenital methemoglobinemia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Autosomal recessive congenital methemoglobinemia is an inherited condition that mainly affects the function of red blood cells. Specifically, it alters a molecule within these cells called hemoglobin. Hemoglobin carries oxygen to cells and tissues throughout the body. In people with autosomal recessive congenital methemoglobinemia, some of the normal hemoglobin is replaced by an abnormal form called methemoglobin, which is unable to deliver oxygen to the body's tissues. As a result, tissues in the body become oxygen deprived, leading to a bluish appearance of the skin, lips, and nails (cyanosis). There are two forms of autosomal recessive congenital methemoglobinemia: types I and II. People with type I have cyanosis from birth and may experience weakness or shortness of breath related to the shortage of oxygen in their tissues. People with type II have cyanosis as well as severe neurological problems. After a few months of apparently normal development, children with type II develop severe brain dysfunction (encephalopathy), uncontrolled muscle tensing (dystonia), and involuntary limb movements (choreoathetosis); also, the size of their head remains small and does not grow in proportion with their body ( microcephaly ). People with type II have severe intellectual disability; they can recognize faces and usually babble but speak no words. They can sit unassisted and grip objects but have impaired motor skills that leave them unable to walk. In type II, growth is often slowed. Abnormal facial muscle movements can interfere with swallowing, which can lead to feeding difficulties and further slow growth. People with autosomal recessive congenital methemoglobinemia type I have a normal life expectancy, but people with type II often do not survive past early adulthood. Frequency The incidence of autosomal recessive congenital methemoglobinemia is unknown. Causes Autosomal recessive congenital methemoglobinemia is caused by mutations in the CYB5R3 gene. This gene provides instruction for making an enzyme called cytochrome b5 reductase 3. This enzyme is involved in transferring negatively charged particles called electrons from one molecule to another. Two versions (isoforms) of this enzyme are produced from the CYB5R3 gene. The soluble isoform is present only in red blood cells, and the membrane-bound isoform is found in all other cell types. Each hemoglobin molecule contains four iron atoms, which are needed to carry oxygen. In normal red blood cells, the iron in hemoglobin is ferrous (Fe 2+ ), but it can spontaneously become ferric (Fe 3+ ). When hemoglobin contains ferric iron, it is methemoglobin. The soluble isoform of cytochrome b5 reductase 3 changes ferric iron back to ferrous iron so hemoglobin can deliver oxygen to tissues. Normally, red blood cells contain less than 2 percent methemoglobin. The membrane-bound isoform is widely used in the body. This isoform is necessary for many chemical reactions, including the breakdown and formation of fatty acids, the formation of cholesterol, and the breakdown of various molecules and drugs. CYB5R3 gene mutations that cause autosomal recessive congenital methemoglobinemia type I typically reduce enzyme activity or stability. As a result, the enzyme cannot efficiently change ferric iron to ferrous iron, leading to a 10 to 50 percent increase in methemoglobin within red blood cells. This increase in methemoglobin and the corresponding decrease in normal hemoglobin reduces the amount of oxygen delivered to tissues. The altered enzyme activity affects only red blood cells because other cells can compensate for a decrease in enzyme activity, but red blood cells cannot. Mutations that cause autosomal recessive congenital methemoglobinemia type II usually result in a complete loss of enzyme activity. Cells cannot compensate for a complete loss of this enzyme, which results in a 10 to 70 percent increase in methemoglobin within red blood cells. This increase in methemoglobin and the corresponding decrease in normal hemoglobin leads to cyanosis. The lack of enzyme activity in other cells leads to the neurological features associated with type II. Researchers suspect that the neurological problems are caused by impaired fatty acid and cholesterol formation, which reduces the production of a fatty substance called myelin. Myelin insulates nerve cells and promotes the rapid transmission of nerve impulses. This reduced ability to form myelin (hypomyelination) leads to a loss of nerve cells, particularly in the brain. The loss of these cells likely contributes to the encephalopathy and movement disorders characteristic of autosomal recessive congenital methemoglobinemia type II. Learn more about the gene associated with Autosomal recessive congenital methemoglobinemia CYB5R3 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Chronic familial methemoglobin reductase deficiency Congenital methemoglobinemia due to NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase 3 deficiency Congenital NADH-methemoglobin reductase deficiency Cytochrome b5 reductase deficiency Deficiency of cytochrome-b5 reductase Diaphorase deficiency NADH-CYB5R deficiency NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: METHEMOGLOBINEMIA, TYPE II Genetic Testing Registry: Methemoglobinemia, type I Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Hereditary methemoglobinemia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM METHEMOGLOBINEMIA DUE TO DEFICIENCY OF METHEMOGLOBIN REDUCTASE Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Arikoglu T, Yarali N, Kara A, Bay A, Bozkaya IO, Tunc B, Percy MJ. A novel
L218P mutation in NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase associated with type I recessive
congenital methemoglobinemia. Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2009 Jul-Aug;26(5):381-5.
doi: 10.1080/08880010902979233. Citation on PubMed Ewenczyk C, Leroux A, Roubergue A, Laugel V, Afenjar A, Saudubray JM, Beauvais
P, Billette de Villemeur T, Vidailhet M, Roze E. Recessive hereditary
methaemoglobinaemia, type II: delineation of the clinical spectrum. Brain. 2008
Mar;131(Pt 3):760-1. doi: 10.1093/brain/awm337. Epub 2008 Jan 17. Citation on PubMed Fermo E, Bianchi P, Vercellati C, Marcello AP, Garatti M, Marangoni O,
Barcellini W, Zanella A. Recessive hereditary methemoglobinemia: two novel
mutations in the NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase gene. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2008
Jul-Aug;41(1):50-5. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2008.02.002. Epub 2008 Mar 17. Citation on PubMed Hudspeth MP, Joseph S, Holden KR. A novel mutation in type II
methemoglobinemia. J Child Neurol. 2010 Jan;25(1):91-3. doi:
10.1177/0883073809336136. Epub 2009 May 26. Citation on PubMed Lorenzo FR 5th, Phillips JD, Nussenzveig R, Lingam B, Koul PA, Schrier SL,
Prchal JT. Molecular basis of two novel mutations found in type I
methemoglobinemia. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2011 Apr 15;46(4):277-81. doi:
10.1016/j.bcmd.2011.01.005. Epub 2011 Feb 24. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Percy MJ, Lappin TR. Recessive congenital methaemoglobinaemia: cytochrome b(5)
reductase deficiency. Br J Haematol. 2008 May;141(3):298-308. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07017.x. Epub 2008 Mar 3. Citation on PubMed Warang PP, Kedar PS, Shanmukaiah C, Ghosh K, Colah RB. Clinical spectrum and
molecular basis of recessive congenital methemoglobinemia in India. Clin Genet.
2015;87(1):62-7. doi: 10.1111/cge.12326. Epub 2013 Dec 20. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Blood Disorders Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Blue discoloration of the skin Genetics Hemoglobin Methemoglobinemia Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated May 1, 2015