Familial Mediterranean fever: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Familial Mediterranean fever URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/familial-mediterranean-fever/ Familial Mediterranean fever To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Familial Mediterranean fever is an inherited condition characterized by recurrent episodes of painful inflammation in the abdomen, chest, or joints.  These episodes are often accompanied by fever and sometimes a rash or headache. Occasionally inflammation may occur in other parts of the body, such as the heart; the membrane surrounding the brain and spinal cord; and in males, the testicles. In about half of affected individuals, attacks are preceded by mild signs and symptoms known as a prodrome. Prodromal symptoms include mildly uncomfortable sensations in the area that will later become inflamed, or more general feelings of discomfort. The first episode of illness in familial Mediterranean fever usually occurs in childhood or the teenage years, but in some cases, the initial attack occurs much later in life. Typically, episodes last 12 to 72 hours and can vary in severity. Episodes generally occur once a month, and in affected women of reproductive age, attacks often correspond with menstruation or ovulation. However, the length of time between episodes can range from days to years. During these periods, affected individuals usually have no signs or symptoms related to the condition. However, without treatment to help prevent attacks and complications, a buildup of protein deposits (amyloidosis) in the body's organs and tissues may occur, especially in the kidneys, which can lead to kidney failure. Frequency Familial Mediterranean fever primarily affects populations originating in the Mediterranean region, particularly people of Armenian, Arab, Turkish, or Jewish ancestry.  The disorder affects 1 in 200 to 1,000 people in these populations.  It is less common in other populations. Causes Familial Mediterranean fever is caused by variants (also known as mutations) in the MEFV gene. The MEFV gene provides instructions for making a protein called pyrin (also known as marenostrin), which is found in white blood cells. This protein is involved in the immune system, helping to regulate the process of inflammation . Inflammation occurs when the immune system sends signaling molecules and white blood cells to a site of injury or disease to fight microbial invaders and facilitate tissue repair. When this process is complete, the body stops the inflammatory response to prevent damage to its own cells and tissues. Variants in the MEFV gene reduce the activity of the pyrin protein, which disrupts control of the inflammation process. An inappropriate or prolonged inflammatory response can result, leading to fever and pain in the abdomen, chest, or joints. Normal variations in the SAA1 gene may modify the course of familial Mediterranean fever. Some evidence suggests that a particular version of the SAA1 gene (called the alpha variant) increases the risk of amyloidosis among people with familial Mediterranean fever. Learn more about the genes associated with Familial Mediterranean fever MEFV SAA1 Inheritance Familial Mediterranean fever is usually inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the MEFV gene in each cell have variants. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Research shows that about one-third of people with familial Mediterranean fever have a single MEFV gene variant, though most experts believe there is a second variant somewhere else in the gene that has not been detected by genetic testing. In rare cases, this condition appears to be inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern . An autosomal dominant inheritance pattern describes cases in which one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In autosomal dominant inheritance, affected individuals often inherit the variant from one affected parent. However, another mechanism is believed to account for some cases of familial Mediterranean fever that were originally thought to be inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. A gene variant that occurs frequently in a population may result in a disorder with autosomal recessive inheritance appearing in multiple generations in a family, a pattern that mimics autosomal dominant inheritance. If one parent has familial Mediterranean fever (with variants in both copies of the MEFV gene in each cell) and the other parent is an unaffected carrier (with a variant in one copy of the MEFV gene in each cell), it may appear as if the affected child inherited the disorder only from the affected parent. This appearance of autosomal dominant inheritance when the pattern is actually autosomal recessive is called pseudodominance. Other Names for This Condition Benign paroxysmal peritonitis Familial paroxysmal polyserositis FMF MEF Recurrent polyserositis Reimann periodic disease Siegal-Cattan-Mamou disease Wolff periodic disease Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Familial Mediterranean fever Genetic Testing Registry: Familial mediterranean fever, autosomal dominant Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Familial Mediterranean fever Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM FAMILIAL MEDITERRANEAN FEVER, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT FAMILIAL MEDITERRANEAN FEVER; FMF Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bakkaloglu A. Familial Mediterranean fever. Pediatr Nephrol. 2003
Sep;18(9):853-9. doi: 10.1007/s00467-003-1185-2. Epub 2003 Jun 27. Citation on PubMed Bhat A, Naguwa SM, Gershwin ME. Genetics and new treatment modalities for
familial Mediterranean fever. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Sep;1110:201-8. doi:
10.1196/annals.1423.022. Citation on PubMed Booth DR, Gillmore JD, Lachmann HJ, Booth SE, Bybee A, Soyturk M, Akar S,
Pepys MB, Tunca M, Hawkins PN. The genetic basis of autosomal dominant familial
Mediterranean fever. QJM. 2000 Apr;93(4):217-21. doi: 10.1093/qjmed/93.4.217. Citation on PubMed Eisenstein EM, Berkun Y, Ben-Chetrit E. Familial Mediterranean fever: a
critical digest of the 2012-2013 literature. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2013
May-Jun;31(3 Suppl 77):103-7. Epub 2013 Sep 9. Citation on PubMed Lidar M, Kedem R, Berkun Y, Langevitz P, Livneh A. Familial Mediterranean
fever in Ashkenazi Jews: the mild end of the clinical spectrum. J Rheumatol. 2010
Feb;37(2):422-5. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.090401. Epub 2009 Dec 15. Citation on PubMed Lidar M, Livneh A. Familial Mediterranean fever: clinical, molecular and
management advancements. Neth J Med. 2007 Oct;65(9):318-24. Citation on PubMed Mikula M, Buller A, Sun W, Strom CM. Prevalence of known mutations in the
familial Mediterranean fever gene (MEFV) in various carrier screening
populations. Genet Med. 2008 May;10(5):349-52. doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181723cc8. Citation on PubMed Rabinovitch E, Harats D, Yaron P, Luvish T, Lidar M, Kedem R, Shaish A,
Ben-Dov I, Livneh A. Familial Mediterranean fever gene and protection against
asthma. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2007 Dec;99(6):517-21. doi:
10.1016/S1081-1206(10)60380-8. Citation on PubMed Stoffman N, Magal N, Shohat T, Lotan R, Koman S, Oron A, Danon Y, Halpern GJ,
Lifshitz Y, Shohat M. Higher than expected carrier rates for familial
Mediterranean fever in various Jewish ethnic groups. Eur J Hum Genet. 2000
Apr;8(4):307-10. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200446. Citation on PubMed Yepiskoposyan L, Harutyunyan A. Population genetics of familial Mediterranean
fever: a review. Eur J Hum Genet. 2007 Sep;15(9):911-6. doi:
10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201869. Epub 2007 Jun 13. Citation on PubMed Zadeh N, Getzug T, Grody WW. Diagnosis and management of familial
Mediterranean fever: integrating medical genetics in a dedicated
interdisciplinary clinic. Genet Med. 2011 Mar;13(3):263-9. doi:
10.1097/GIM.0b013e31820e27b1. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Fever Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Familial Mediterranean fever Genetics Secondary systemic amyloidosis Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 11, 2021