8p11 myeloproliferative syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → 8p11 myeloproliferative syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/8p11-myeloproliferative-syndrome/ 8p11 myeloproliferative syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description 8p11 myeloproliferative syndrome is a blood cancer that involves different types of blood cells. Blood cells are divided into several groups (lineages) based on the type of early cell from which they are descended. Two of these lineages are myeloid cells and lymphoid cells. Individuals with 8p11 myeloproliferative syndrome can develop both myeloid cell cancer and lymphoid cell cancer. The condition can occur at any age. It usually begins as a myeloproliferative disorder, which is characterized by a high number of white blood cells (leukocytes). Most affected individuals also have an excess of myeloid cells known as eosinophils (eosinophilia). In addition to a myeloproliferative disorder, many people with 8p11 myeloproliferative syndrome develop lymphoma , which is a form of blood cancer that involves lymphoid cells. The cancerous lymphoid cells grow and divide in lymph nodes, forming a tumor that enlarges the lymph nodes. In most cases of 8p11 myeloproliferative syndrome, the cancerous cells are lymphoid cells called T cells. Lymphoma can develop at the same time as the myeloproliferative disorder or later. In most people with 8p11 myeloproliferative syndrome, the myeloproliferative disorder develops into a fast-growing blood cancer called acute myeloid leukemia. The rapid myeloid and lymphoid cell production caused by these cancers results in enlargement of the spleen and liver (splenomegaly and hepatomegaly, respectively). Most people with 8p11 myeloproliferative syndrome have symptoms such as fatigue or night sweats. Some affected individuals have no symptoms, and the condition is discovered through routine blood tests. Frequency The prevalence of 8p11 myeloproliferative syndrome is unknown. It is thought to be a rare condition. Causes 8p11 myeloproliferative syndrome is caused by rearrangements of genetic material (translocations) between two chromosomes.  All of the translocations that cause this condition involve the FGFR1 gene, which is found on the short (p) arm of chromosome 8 at a position described as p11. The translocations lead to fusion of part of the FGFR1 gene with part of another gene; the most common partner gene is ZMYM2 on chromosome 13 . These genetic changes are found only in cancer cells. The protein normally produced from the FGFR1 gene can trigger a cascade of chemical reactions that instruct the cell to undergo certain changes, such as growing and dividing. This signaling is turned on when the FGFR1 protein interacts with growth factors. In contrast, when the FGFR1 gene is fused with another gene, FGFR1 signaling is turned on without the need for stimulation by growth factors. The uncontrolled signaling promotes continuous cell growth and division, leading to cancer. Researchers believe the mutations that cause this condition occur in a very early blood cell called a stem cell that has the ability to mature into either a myeloid cell or a lymphoid cell. For this reason, this condition is sometimes referred to as stem cell leukemia/lymphoma. Learn more about the genes and chromosomes associated with 8p11 myeloproliferative syndrome FGFR1 ZMYM2 chromosome 13 chromosome 8 Inheritance This condition is generally not inherited but arises from a mutation in the body's cells that occurs after conception. This alteration is called a somatic mutation. Other Names for This Condition 8p11 stem cell leukemia/lymphoma syndrome 8p11 stem cell syndrome Myeloid and lymphoid neoplasms with FGFR1 abnormalities Stem cell leukemia/lymphoma Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Myeloid neoplasm associated with FGFR1 rearrangement Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CHROMOSOME 8p11 MYELOPROLIFERATIVE SYNDROME Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Dong S, Kang S, Gu TL, Kardar S, Fu H, Lonial S, Khoury HJ, Khuri F, Chen J.
14-3-3 Integrates prosurvival signals mediated by the AKT and MAPK pathways in
ZNF198-FGFR1-transformed hematopoietic cells. Blood. 2007 Jul 1;110(1):360-9.
doi: 10.1182/blood-2006-12-065615. Epub 2007 Mar 27. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Goradia A, Bayerl M, Cornfield D. The 8p11 myeloproliferative syndrome: review
of literature and an illustrative case report. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2008 Jan
1;1(5):448-56. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Jackson CC, Medeiros LJ, Miranda RN. 8p11 myeloproliferative syndrome: a
review. Hum Pathol. 2010 Apr;41(4):461-76. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.11.003. Citation on PubMed Xiao S, Nalabolu SR, Aster JC, Ma J, Abruzzo L, Jaffe ES, Stone R, Weissman
SM, Hudson TJ, Fletcher JA. FGFR1 is fused with a novel zinc-finger gene, ZNF198,
in the t(8;13) leukaemia/lymphoma syndrome. Nat Genet. 1998 Jan;18(1):84-7. doi:
10.1038/ng0198-84. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Acute Myeloid Leukemia Blood Disorders Bone Marrow Diseases Genetic Disorders Lymphoma MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated July 1, 2013