Naegeli-Franceschetti-Jadassohn syndrome/dermatopathia pigmentosa reticularis: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Naegeli-Franceschetti-Jadassohn syndrome/dermatopathia pigmentosa reticularis URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/naegeli-franceschetti-jadassohn-syndrome-dermatopathia-pigmentosa-reticularis/ Naegeli-Franceschetti-Jadassohn syndrome/dermatopathia pigmentosa reticularis To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Naegeli-Franceschetti-Jadassohn syndrome/dermatopathia pigmentosa reticularis (NFJS/DPR) represents a rare type of ectodermal dysplasia, a group of about 150 conditions characterized by abnormal development of ectodermal tissues including the skin, hair, nails, teeth, and sweat glands. NFJS and DPR were originally described as separate conditions; however, because they have similar features and are caused by mutations in the same gene, they are now often considered forms of the same disorder. Among the most common signs of NFJS/DPR is a net-like pattern of dark brown or gray skin coloring, known as reticulate hyperpigmentation. This darker pigmentation is seen most often on the neck, chest, and abdomen, although it can also occur in and around the eyes and mouth. Reticulate hyperpigmentation appears in infancy or early childhood. It may fade with age or persist throughout life. NFJS/DPR also affects the skin on the hands and feet. The skin on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet often becomes thick, hard, and callused, a condition known as palmoplantar keratoderma. Some affected individuals also have blistering on their palms and soles. Their fingernails and toenails may be malformed, brittle, and either thicker or thinner than usual. Most affected individuals are missing the patterned ridges on the skin of the hands and feet, called dermatoglyphs, that are the basis for each person's unique fingerprints. Additional features of NFJS/DPR can include a reduced ability to sweat (hypohidrosis) or excess sweating (hyperhidrosis) and dental abnormalities. Some affected individuals also have hair loss (alopecia) on the scalp, eyebrows, and underarms. The alopecia is described as noncicatricial because it does not leave scars (cicatrices). Frequency NFJS/DPR is a rare condition; its prevalence is unknown. Only a few affected families have been reported in the medical literature. Causes NFJS/DPR results from mutations in the KRT14 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called keratin 14. Keratins are tough, fibrous proteins that provide strength and resiliency to the outer layer of the skin (the epidermis). Researchers believe that keratin 14 may also play a role in the formation of sweat glands and the development of dermatoglyphs. The KRT14 gene mutations that cause NFJS/DPR most likely reduce the amount of functional keratin 14 that is produced in cells. A shortage of this protein makes cells in the epidermis more likely to self-destruct ( undergo apoptosis ). The resulting loss of these cells alters the normal development and structure of ectodermal tissues, which likely underlies most of the skin and nail problems characteristic of NFJS/DPR. However, it is unclear how a shortage of keratin 14 is related to changes in skin pigmentation. Learn more about the gene associated with Naegeli-Franceschetti-Jadassohn syndrome/dermatopathia pigmentosa reticularis KRT14 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition DPR Franceschetti-Jadassohn syndrome Naegeli syndrome Naegeli-Franceschetti-Jadassohn syndrome NFJ syndrome NFJS NFJS/DPR Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Dermatopathia pigmentosa reticularis Genetic Testing Registry: Naegeli-Franceschetti-Jadassohn syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Naegeli-Franceschetti-Jadassohn syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM DERMATOPATHIA PIGMENTOSA RETICULARIS; DPR NAEGELI-FRANCESCHETTI-JADASSOHN SYNDROME; NFJS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Heimer WL 2nd, Brauner G, James WD. Dermatopathia pigmentosa reticularis: a
report of a family demonstrating autosomal dominant inheritance. J Am Acad
Dermatol. 1992 Feb;26(2 Pt 2):298-301. doi: 10.1016/0190-9622(92)70039-i. Citation on PubMed Itin PH, Lautenschlager S, Meyer R, Mevorah B, Rufli T. Natural history of the
Naegeli-Franceschetti-Jadassohn syndrome and further delineation of its clinical
manifestations. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1993 Jun;28(6):942-50. doi:
10.1016/0190-9622(93)70135-g. Citation on PubMed Lugassy J, Itin P, Ishida-Yamamoto A, Holland K, Huson S, Geiger D, Hennies
HC, Indelman M, Bercovich D, Uitto J, Bergman R, McGrath JA, Richard G, Sprecher
E. Naegeli-Franceschetti-Jadassohn syndrome and dermatopathia pigmentosa
reticularis: two allelic ectodermal dysplasias caused by dominant mutations in
KRT14. Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Oct;79(4):724-30. doi: 10.1086/507792. Epub 2006 Aug
25. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Lugassy J, McGrath JA, Itin P, Shemer R, Verbov J, Murphy HR, Ishida-Yamamoto
A, Digiovanna JJ, Bercovich D, Karin N, Vitenshtein A, Uitto J, Bergman R,
Richard G, Sprecher E. KRT14 haploinsufficiency results in increased
susceptibility of keratinocytes to TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis and causes
Naegeli-Franceschetti-Jadassohn syndrome. J Invest Dermatol. 2008
Jun;128(6):1517-24. doi: 10.1038/sj.jid.5701187. Epub 2007 Nov 29. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Skin Conditions Skin Pigmentation Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Ectodermal dysplasia Genetics Hair loss Nail abnormalities Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated May 1, 2013