Spastic paraplegia type 2: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Spastic paraplegia type 2 URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/spastic-paraplegia-type-2/ Spastic paraplegia type 2 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Spastic paraplegia type 2 is part of a group of genetic disorders known as hereditary spastic paraplegias. These disorders are characterized by progressive muscle stiffness (spasticity) and the development of paralysis of the lower limbs (paraplegia). Hereditary spastic paraplegias are divided into two types: pure and complex. The pure types involve the lower limbs. The complex types involve the lower limbs and can also affect the upper limbs to a lesser degree; the structure or functioning of the brain; and the nerves connecting the brain and spinal cord to muscles and sensory cells that detect sensations such as touch, pain, heat, and sound (the peripheral nervous system). Spastic paraplegia type 2 can occur in either the pure or complex form. People with the pure form of spastic paraplegia type 2 experience spasticity in the lower limbs, usually without any additional features.  People with the complex form of spastic paraplegia type 2 have lower limb spasticity and can also experience problems with movement and balance (ataxia); involuntary movements of the eyes (nystagmus); mild intellectual disability; involuntary, rhythmic shaking (tremor); and degeneration (atrophy) of the optic nerves, which carry information from the eyes to the brain.  Symptoms usually become apparent between the ages of 1 and 5 years; those affected are typically able to walk and have a normal lifespan. Frequency The prevalence of all hereditary spastic paraplegias combined is estimated to be 2 to 6 in 100,000 people worldwide. Spastic paraplegia type 2 likely accounts for only a small percentage of all spastic paraplegia cases. Causes Mutations in the PLP1 gene cause spastic paraplegia 2.  The PLP1 gene provides instructions for producing proteolipid protein 1 and a modified version (isoform) of proteolipid protein 1, called DM20.  Proteolipid protein 1 and DM20 are primarily located in the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system) and are the main proteins found in myelin , the fatty covering that insulates nerve fibers.  A lack of proteolipid protein 1 and DM20 can cause a reduction in the formation of myelin (dysmyelination) which can impair nervous system function, resulting in the signs and symptoms of spastic paraplegia type 2. Learn more about the gene associated with Spastic paraplegia type 2 PLP1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern . A condition is considered X-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. Because females have two copies of the X chromosome, one altered copy of the gene in each cell usually leads to less severe symptoms in females than in males, or may cause no symptoms at all. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons. In X-linked recessive inheritance, a female with one altered copy of the gene in each cell is called a carrier. She can pass on the gene, but generally does not experience signs and symptoms of the disorder.  Some females who carry a PLP1 mutation, however, may experience muscle stiffness and a decrease in intellectual function.  Females with one PLP1 mutation have an increased risk of experiencing progressive deterioration of cognitive functions (dementia) later in life. Other Names for This Condition Hereditary X-linked recessive spastic paraplegia Spastic paraplegia 2 X linked recessive hereditary spastic paraplegia Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary spastic paraplegia Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary spastic paraplegia 2 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Hereditary spastic paraplegia Spastic paraplegia type 2 Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 2, X-LINKED; SPG2 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Cailloux F, Gauthier-Barichard F, Mimault C, Isabelle V, Courtois V, Giraud G,
Dastugue B, Boespflug-Tanguy O. Genotype-phenotype correlation in inherited brain
myelination defects due to proteolipid protein gene mutations. Clinical European
Network on Brain Dysmyelinating Disease. Eur J Hum Genet. 2000 Nov;8(11):837-45.
doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200537. Citation on PubMed Hudson LD. Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease and spastic paraplegia type 2: two
faces of myelin loss from mutations in the same gene. J Child Neurol. 2003
Sep;18(9):616-24. doi: 10.1177/08830738030180090801. Citation on PubMed Inoue K, Tanaka H, Scaglia F, Araki A, Shaffer LG, Lupski JR. Compensating for
central nervous system dysmyelination: females with a proteolipid protein gene
duplication and sustained clinical improvement. Ann Neurol. 2001
Dec;50(6):747-54. doi: 10.1002/ana.10036. Citation on PubMed Inoue K. PLP1-related inherited dysmyelinating disorders: Pelizaeus-Merzbacher
disease and spastic paraplegia type 2. Neurogenetics. 2005 Feb;6(1):1-16. doi:
10.1007/s10048-004-0207-y. Epub 2004 Dec 31. Citation on PubMed Reid E. Science in motion: common molecular pathological themes emerge in the
hereditary spastic paraplegias. J Med Genet. 2003 Feb;40(2):81-6. doi:
10.1136/jmg.40.2.81. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Soderblom C, Blackstone C. Traffic accidents: molecular genetic insights into
the pathogenesis of the hereditary spastic paraplegias. Pharmacol Ther. 2006
Jan;109(1-2):42-56. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2005.06.001. Epub 2005 Jul 7. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Neurologic Diseases Neuromuscular Disorders Paralysis MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 1, 2008