Aromatase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Aromatase deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/aromatase-deficiency/ Aromatase deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Aromatase deficiency is a condition characterized by reduced levels of the female sex hormone estrogen and increased levels of the male sex hormone testosterone. Females with aromatase deficiency have a typical female chromosome pattern ( 46,XX ) but are born with external genitalia that do not appear clearly female or male. These individuals typically have normal internal reproductive organs , but develop ovarian cysts early in childhood, which impair the release of egg cells from the ovaries (ovulation). In adolescence, most affected females do not develop secondary sexual characteristics, such as breast growth and menstrual periods. They tend to develop acne and excessive body hair growth (hirsutism). Men with this condition have a typical male chromosome pattern ( 46,XY ) and are born with male external genitalia. Some men with this condition have decreased sex drive, abnormal sperm production, or testes that are small or undescended (cryptorchidism). There are other features associated with aromatase deficiency that can affect both males and females. Affected individuals are abnormally tall because of excessive growth of long bones in the arms and legs. The abnormal bone growth results in slowed mineralization of bones (delayed bone age) and thinning of the bones ( osteoporosis ), which can lead to bone fractures with little trauma.  In affected individuals, the body does not respond correctly to the hormone insulin , so people with aromatase deficiency can have abnormally high blood sugar (glucose), a condition known as hyperglycemia. In addition, people with armoatase deficiency can have excessive weight gain and a fatty liver. Women who are pregnant with fetuses that have aromatase deficiency often experience mild symptoms of the disorder even though they themselves do not have the disorder. These women may develop hirsutism, acne, an enlarged clitoris (clitoromegaly), and a deep voice. These features can appear as early as 12 weeks of pregnancy and go away soon after delivery. Frequency The prevalence of aromatase deficiency is unknown; approximately 20 cases have been described in the medical literature. Causes Mutations in the CYP19A1 gene cause aromatase deficiency. The CYP19A1 gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called aromatase. This enzyme converts a class of hormones called androgens, which are involved in male sexual development, to different forms of estrogen. In females, estrogen guides female sexual development before birth and during puberty. In both males and females, estrogen plays a role in regulating bone growth and blood glucose levels. During fetal development, aromatase converts androgens to estrogens in the placenta, which is the link between the mother's blood supply and the fetus. This conversion in the placenta prevents androgens from directing sexual development in female fetuses. After birth, the conversion of androgens to estrogens takes place in multiple tissues. CYP19A1 gene mutations that cause aromatase deficiency decrease or eliminate aromatase activity. A shortage of functional aromatase results in an inability to convert androgens to estrogens before birth and throughout life. As a result, there is a decrease in estrogen production and an increase in the levels of androgens, including testosterone. In affected individuals, these abnormal hormone levels lead to impaired female sexual development, unusual bone growth, insulin resistance, and other signs and symptoms of aromatase deficiency. In women who are pregnant with an affected fetus, excess androgens in the placenta pass into the woman's bloodstream, which may cause her to have temporary signs and symptoms of aromatase deficiency. Learn more about the gene associated with Aromatase deficiency CYP19A1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition 46,XX disorder of sex development (DSD) due to placental aromatase deficiency Estrogen synthetase deficiency Oestrogen synthetase deficiency Placental aromatase deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Aromatase deficiency Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Aromatase deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM AROMATASE DEFICIENCY Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Baykan EK, Erdogan M, Ozen S, Darcan S, Saygili LF. Aromatase deficiency, a
rare syndrome: case report. J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol. 2013;5(2):129-32. doi:
10.4274/Jcrpe.970. Erratum In: J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol. 2013 Sep
10;5(3):216. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Belgorosky A, Guercio G, Pepe C, Saraco N, Rivarola MA. Genetic and clinical
spectrum of aromatase deficiency in infancy, childhood and adolescence. Horm Res.
2009;72(6):321-30. doi: 10.1159/000249159. Epub 2009 Oct 21. Citation on PubMed Bulun SE. Aromatase and estrogen receptor alpha deficiency. Fertil Steril. 2014
Feb;101(2):323-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2013.12.022. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Ludwikowski B, Heger S, Datz N, Richter-Unruh A, Gonzalez R. Aromatase
deficiency: rare cause of virilization. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2013
Oct;23(5):418-22. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1324798. Epub 2012 Oct 23. No abstract
available. Citation on PubMed Rochira V, Carani C. Aromatase deficiency in men: a clinical perspective. Nat
Rev Endocrinol. 2009 Oct;5(10):559-68. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2009.176. Epub 2009
Aug 25. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Endocrine Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Ambiguous genitalia Genetics Ovarian overproduction of androgens Virilization Related Medical Tests Blood Glucose Test Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated April 1, 2014