Geleophysic dysplasia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Geleophysic dysplasia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/geleophysic-dysplasia/ Geleophysic dysplasia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Geleophysic dysplasia is an inherited condition that affects many parts of the body.  It is characterized by abnormalities involving the bones, joints, heart, and skin. People with geleophysic dysplasia have short stature with very short hands and feet . Most also develop thickened skin and joint deformities called contractures, both of which significantly limit mobility. Affected individuals usually have a limited range of motion in their fingers, toes, wrists, and elbows. Additionally, contractures in the legs and hips cause many affected people to walk on their toes. The name of this condition, which comes from the Greek words for happy ("gelios") and nature ("physis"), is derived from the good-natured facial appearance seen in most affected individuals.  The distinctive facial features associated with this condition include a round face with full cheeks , a small nose with upturned nostrils, a broad nasal bridge , a thin upper lip , upturned corners of the mouth , and a flat area between the upper lip and the nose (philtrum) . Geleophysic dysplasia is also characterized by heart (cardiac) problems, particularly abnormalities of the cardiac valves. These valves normally control the flow of blood through the heart. In people with geleophysic dysplasia, the cardiac valves thicken, which impedes blood flow and increases blood pressure in the heart. Other heart problems have also been reported in people with geleophysic dysplasia; these include a narrowing of the artery from the heart to the lungs (pulmonary stenosis) and a hole between the two upper chambers of the heart ( atrial septal defect ). Other features of geleophysic dysplasia can include an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly) and recurrent respiratory and ear infections. In severe cases, a narrowing of the windpipe (tracheal stenosis) can cause serious breathing problems. As a result of heart and respiratory abnormalities, geleophysic dysplasia is often life-threatening in childhood. However, some affected people have lived into adulthood. Frequency Geleophysic dysplasia is a rare disorder whose prevalence is unknown. More than 30 affected individuals have been reported. Causes Geleophysic dysplasia results from mutations in the ADAMTSL2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein whose function is unclear. The protein is found in the extracellular matrix, which is the intricate lattice of proteins and other molecules that forms in the spaces between cells.  Studies suggest that the ADAMTSL2 protein may play a role in the microfibrillar network, which is an organized clustering of thread-like filaments (called microfibrils) in the extracellular matrix.  This network provides strength and flexibility to tissues throughout the body. Mutations in the ADAMTSL2 protein likely change the protein's 3-dimensional structure. Through a process that is poorly understood, ADAMTSL2 gene mutations alter the microfibrillar network in many different tissues. Impairment of this essential network disrupts the normal functions of cells, which likely contributes to the varied signs and symptoms of geleophysic dysplasia. Researchers are working to determine how mutations in the ADAMTSL2 gene lead to short stature, heart disease, and the other features of this condition. Learn more about the genes associated with Geleophysic dysplasia ADAMTSL2 FBN1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Geleophysic dwarfism Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Geleophysic dysplasia 2 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Geleophysic dysplasia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM GELEOPHYSIC DYSPLASIA 1; GPHYSD1 GELEOPHYSIC DYSPLASIA 2; GPHYSD2 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Giray O, Kyr M, Bora E, Saylam G, Ugurlu B, Gurel D. Clinical and
morphological phenotype of geleophysic dysplasia. Ann Trop Paediatr. 2008
Jun;28(2):161-4. doi: 10.1179/146532808X302206. Citation on PubMed Le Goff C, Morice-Picard F, Dagoneau N, Wang LW, Perrot C, Crow YJ, Bauer F,
Flori E, Prost-Squarcioni C, Krakow D, Ge G, Greenspan DS, Bonnet D, Le Merrer M,
Munnich A, Apte SS, Cormier-Daire V. ADAMTSL2 mutations in geleophysic dysplasia
demonstrate a role for ADAMTS-like proteins in TGF-beta bioavailability
regulation. Nat Genet. 2008 Sep;40(9):1119-23. doi: 10.1038/ng.199. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Marzin P, Cormier-Daire V. Geleophysic Dysplasia. 2009 Sep 22 [updated 2024
Mar 28]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A,
editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of
Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK11168/ Citation on PubMed Pontz BF, Stoss H, Henschke F, Freisinger P, Karbowski A, Spranger J. Clinical
and ultrastructural findings in three patients with geleophysic dysplasia. Am J
Med Genet. 1996 May 3;63(1):50-4. doi:
10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19960503)63:13.0.CO;2-T. Citation on PubMed Rosser EM, Wilkinson AR, Hurst JA, McGaughran JM, Donnai D. Geleophysic
dysplasia: a report of three affected boys--prenatal ultrasound does not detect
recurrence. Am J Med Genet. 1995 Sep 11;58(3):217-21. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.1320580304. Citation on PubMed Santolaya JM, Groninga LC, Delgado A, Monasterio JL, Camarero C, Bilbao FJ.
Patients with geleophysic dysplasia are not always geleophysic. Am J Med Genet.
1997 Oct 3;72(1):85-90. Citation on PubMed Scott A, Yeung S, Dickinson DF, Karbani G, Crow YJ. Natural history of cardiac
involvement in geleophysic dysplasia. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Jan
30;132A(3):320-3. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30450. Citation on PubMed Shohat M, Gruber HE, Pagon RA, Witcoff LJ, Lachman R, Ferry D, Flaum E, Rimoin
DL. Geleophysic dysplasia: a storage disorder affecting the skin, bone, liver,
heart, and trachea. J Pediatr. 1990 Aug;117(2 Pt 1):227-32. doi:
10.1016/s0022-3476(05)80534-7. Citation on PubMed Wraith JE, Bankier A, Chow CW, Danks DM, Sardharwalla IB. Geleophysic
dysplasia. Am J Med Genet. 1990 Feb;35(2):153-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320350202. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Growth Disorders Heart Valve Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Short stature Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 1, 2009