Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/ghosal-hematodiaphyseal-dysplasia/ Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia is a rare inherited condition characterized by abnormally thick bones and a shortage of red blood cells ( anemia ). Signs and symptoms of the condition become apparent in early childhood. In affected individuals, the long bones in the arms and legs are unusually dense and wide. The bone changes specifically affect the shafts of the long bones, called diaphyses, and areas near the ends of the bones called metaphyses. The bone abnormalities can lead to bowing of the legs and difficulty walking. Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia also causes scarring (fibrosis) of the bone marrow, which is the spongy tissue inside long bones where blood cells are formed. The abnormal bone marrow cannot produce enough red blood cells, which leads to anemia. Signs and symptoms of anemia that have been reported in people with Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia include extremely pale skin (pallor) and excessive tiredness (fatigue). Frequency Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia is a rare disorder; only a few cases have been reported in the medical literature. Most affected individuals have been from the Middle East and India. Causes Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia results from mutations in the TBXAS1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called thromboxane A synthase 1, which acts as part of a chemical signaling pathway involved in normal blood clotting ( hemostasis ). Based on its role in Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia, researchers suspect that thromboxane A synthase 1 may also be important for bone remodeling, which is a normal process in which old bone is removed and new bone is created to replace it, and for the production of red blood cells in bone marrow . Mutations in the TBXAS1 gene severely reduce the activity of thromboxane A synthase 1. Studies suggest that a lack of this enzyme's activity may lead to abnormal bone remodeling and fibrosis of the bone marrow. However, the mechanism by which a shortage of thromboxane A synthase 1 activity leads to the particular abnormalities characteristic of Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia is unclear. Learn more about the gene associated with Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia TBXAS1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Diaphyseal dysplasia associated with anemia GHDD Ghosal hemato-diaphyseal dysplasia Ghosal syndrome Ghosal-type hemato-diaphyseal dysplasia Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM GHOSAL HEMATODIAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA; GHDD Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Genevieve D, Proulle V, Isidor B, Bellais S, Serre V, Djouadi F, Picard C,
Vignon-Savoye C, Bader-Meunier B, Blanche S, de Vernejoul MC, Legeai-Mallet L,
Fischer AM, Le Merrer M, Dreyfus M, Gaussem P, Munnich A, Cormier-Daire V.
Thromboxane synthase mutations in an increased bone density disorder (Ghosal
syndrome). Nat Genet. 2008 Mar;40(3):284-6. doi: 10.1038/ng.2007.66. Epub 2008
Feb 10. Citation on PubMed Ghosal SP, Mukherjee AK, Mukherjee D, Ghosh AK. Diaphyseal dysplasia
associated with anemia. J Pediatr. 1988 Jul;113(1 Pt 1):49-57. doi:
10.1016/s0022-3476(88)80527-4. Erratum In: J Pediatr 1988 Aug;113(2):410. Citation on PubMed Gumruk F, Besim A, Altay C. Ghosal haemato-diaphyseal dysplasia: a new
disorder. Eur J Pediatr. 1993 Mar;152(3):218-21. doi: 10.1007/BF01956148. Citation on PubMed Isidor B, Dagoneau N, Huber C, Genevieve D, Bader-Meunier B, Blanche S, Picard
C, De Vernejoul MC, Munnich A, Le Merrer M, Cormier-Daire V. A gene responsible
for Ghosal hemato-diaphyseal dysplasia maps to chromosome 7q33-34. Hum Genet.
2007 Apr;121(2):269-73. doi: 10.1007/s00439-006-0311-1. Epub 2007 Jan 3. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Anemia Bone Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Anemia Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 1, 2014