Congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/congenital-bilateral-absence-of-the-vas-deferens/ Congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens occurs in males when the tubes that carry sperm out of the testes (the vas deferens) fail to develop properly.  Although the testes usually develop and function normally, sperm cannot be transported through the vas deferens to become part of semen.  As a result, men with this condition are unable to father children (infertile) unless they use assisted reproductive technologies.  This condition has not been reported to affect sex drive or sexual performance. This condition can occur alone or as a sign of cystic fibrosis , an inherited disease of the mucus glands. Cystic fibrosis causes progressive damage to the respiratory system and chronic digestive system problems. Many men with congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens do not have the other characteristic features of cystic fibrosis; however, some men with this condition may experience mild respiratory or digestive problems. Frequency This condition is responsible for 1 percent to 2 percent of all infertility in men. Causes Mutations in the CFTR gene cause congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens. More than half of all men with this condition have mutations in the CFTR gene. Mutations in this gene also cause cystic fibrosis. When congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens occurs with CFTR mutations and without other features of cystic fibrosis, the condition is considered a form of atypical cystic fibrosis. The protein made from the CFTR gene forms a channel that transports negatively charged particles called chloride ions into and out of cells. The flow of chloride ions helps control the movement of water in tissues, which is necessary for the production of thin, freely flowing mucus. Mucus is a slippery substance that lubricates and protects the linings of the airways, digestive system, reproductive system, and other organs and tissues. Mutations in the CFTR gene disrupt the function of the chloride channels, preventing them from regulating the flow of chloride ions and water across cell membranes. As a result, cells in the male genital tract produce mucus that is abnormally thick and sticky. This mucus clogs the vas deferens as they are forming, causing them to deteriorate before birth. In instances of congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens without a mutation in the CFTR gene, the cause of this condition is often unknown. Some cases are associated with other structural problems of the urinary tract. Learn more about the gene associated with Congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens CFTR Inheritance When this condition is caused by mutations in the CFTR gene, it is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern .  This pattern of inheritance means that both copies of the gene in each cell have a mutation.  Men with this condition who choose to father children through assisted reproduction have an increased risk of having a child with cystic fibrosis.  If congenital absence of the vas deferens is not caused by mutations in CFTR , the risk of having children with cystic fibrosis is not increased. Other Names for This Condition Absence of vas deferens Absent vasa CAVD CBAVD Congenital absence of vas deferens Congenital aplasia of vas deferens Congenital bilateral absence of vas deferens Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital bilateral aplasia of vas deferens from CFTR mutation Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Congenital bilateral absence of vas deferens Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM VAS DEFERENS, CONGENITAL BILATERAL APLASIA OF; CBAVD Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Cuppens H, Cassiman JJ. CFTR mutations and polymorphisms in male infertility.
Int J Androl. 2004 Oct;27(5):251-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2605.2004.00485.x. Citation on PubMed Daudin M, Bieth E, Bujan L, Massat G, Pontonnier F, Mieusset R. Congenital
bilateral absence of the vas deferens: clinical characteristics, biological
parameters, cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene mutations,
and implications for genetic counseling. Fertil Steril. 2000 Dec;74(6):1164-74.
doi: 10.1016/s0015-0282(00)01625-3. Citation on PubMed de Souza DAS, Faucz FR, Pereira-Ferrari L, Sotomaior VS, Raskin S. Congenital
bilateral absence of the vas deferens as an atypical form of cystic fibrosis:
reproductive implications and genetic counseling. Andrology. 2018
Jan;6(1):127-135. doi: 10.1111/andr.12450. Epub 2017 Dec 7. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Gilljam M, Moltyaner Y, Downey GP, Devlin R, Durie P, Cantin AM, Zielenski J,
Tullis DE. Airway inflammation and infection in congenital bilateral absence of
the vas deferens. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2004 Jan 15;169(2):174-9. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200304-558OC. Epub 2003 Oct 9. Citation on PubMed Jarzabek K, Zbucka M, Pepinski W, Szamatowicz J, Domitrz J, Janica J,
Wolczynski S, Szamatowicz M. Cystic fibrosis as a cause of infertility. Reprod
Biol. 2004 Jul;4(2):119-29. Citation on PubMed Nick JA, Rodman DM. Manifestations of cystic fibrosis diagnosed in adulthood.
Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2005 Nov;11(6):513-8. doi:
10.1097/01.mcp.0000183052.56728.76. Citation on PubMed Noone PG, Knowles MR. 'CFTR-opathies': disease phenotypes associated with
cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator gene mutations. Respir Res.
2001;2(6):328-32. doi: 10.1186/rr82. Epub 2001 Aug 9. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Samli H, Samli MM, Yilmaz E, Imirzalioglu N. Clinical, andrological and
genetic characteristics of patients with congenital bilateral absence of vas
deferens (CBAVD). Arch Androl. 2006 Nov-Dec;52(6):471-7. doi:
10.1080/01485010600691993. Citation on PubMed Savant A, Lyman B, Bojanowski C, Upadia J. Cystic Fibrosis. 2001 Mar 26
[updated 2024 Aug 8]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE,
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University
of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1250/ Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Assisted Reproductive Technology Genetic Disorders Male Infertility MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Infertility Pathway of sperm (Image) Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated October 1, 2018