Cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/cerebral-autosomal-recessive-arteriopathy-with-subcortical-infarcts-and-leukoencephalopathy/ Cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy, commonly known as CARASIL, is an inherited condition that causes stroke and other impairments. Abnormalities affecting the brain and other parts of the nervous system become apparent in an affected person's twenties or thirties. Often, muscle stiffness (spasticity) in the legs and problems with walking are the first signs of the disorder. About half of affected individuals have a stroke or similar episode before age 40. As the disease progresses, most people with CARASIL also develop mood and personality changes, a decline in thinking ability (dementia), memory loss, and worsening problems with movement. Other characteristic features of CARASIL include premature hair loss (alopecia) and attacks of low back pain. The hair loss often begins during adolescence and is limited to the scalp. Back pain, which develops in early to mid-adulthood, results from the breakdown (degeneration) of the discs that separate the bones of the spine (vertebrae) from one another. The signs and symptoms of CARASIL worsen slowly with time. Over the course of several years, affected individuals become less able to control their emotions and communicate with others. They increasingly require help with personal care and other activities of daily living; after a few years, they become unable to care for themselves. Most affected individuals die within a decade after signs and symptoms first appear, although few people with the disease have survived for 20 to 30 years. Frequency CARASIL appears to be a rare condition. It has been identified in about 50 people, primarily in Japan and China. Causes CARASIL is caused by mutations in the HTRA1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme that is found in many of the body's organs and tissues. One of the major functions of the HTRA1 enzyme is to regulate signaling by proteins in the transforming growth factor-beta ( TGF-β ) family. TGF-β signaling is essential for many critical cell functions. It also plays an important role in the formation of new blood vessels (angiogenesis). In people with CARASIL, mutations in the HTRA1 gene prevent the effective regulation of TGF-β signaling. Researchers suspect that abnormally increased TGF-β signaling alters the structure of small blood vessels, particularly in the brain. These blood vessel abnormalities (described as arteriopathy) greatly increase the risk of stroke and lead to the death of nerve cells (neurons) in many areas of the brain. Dysregulation of TGF-β signaling may also underlie the hair loss and back pain seen in people with CARASIL, although the relationship between abnormal TGF-β signaling and these features is less clear. Learn more about the gene associated with Cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy HTRA1 Inheritance As its name suggests, this condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern . Autosomal recessive inheritance means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition CARASIL Familial young-adult-onset arteriosclerotic leukoencephalopathy with alopecia and lumbago without arterial hypertension Maeda syndrome Nemoto disease Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: CARASIL syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy-subcortical infarcts-leukoencephalopathy Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CEREBRAL ARTERIOPATHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, WITH SUBCORTICAL INFARCTS AND LEUKOENCEPHALOPATHY; CARASIL Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Fukutake T. Cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical
infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CARASIL): from discovery to gene
identification. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2011 Mar-Apr;20(2):85-93. doi:
10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2010.11.008. Epub 2011 Jan 7. Citation on PubMed Hara K, Shiga A, Fukutake T, Nozaki H, Miyashita A, Yokoseki A, Kawata H,
Koyama A, Arima K, Takahashi T, Ikeda M, Shiota H, Tamura M, Shimoe Y, Hirayama
M, Arisato T, Yanagawa S, Tanaka A, Nakano I, Ikeda S, Yoshida Y, Yamamoto T,
Ikeuchi T, Kuwano R, Nishizawa M, Tsuji S, Onodera O. Association of HTRA1
mutations and familial ischemic cerebral small-vessel disease. N Engl J Med. 2009
Apr 23;360(17):1729-39. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0801560. Citation on PubMed Oide T, Nakayama H, Yanagawa S, Ito N, Ikeda S, Arima K. Extensive loss of
arterial medial smooth muscle cells and mural extracellular matrix in cerebral
autosomal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and
leukoencephalopathy (CARASIL). Neuropathology. 2008 Apr;28(2):132-42. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1789.2007.00864.x. Epub 2007 Nov 6. Citation on PubMed Onodera O, Nozaki H, Fukutake T. HTRA1 Disorder. 2010 Apr 27 [updated
2019 Nov 7]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A,
editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of
Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK32533/ Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Dementia Genetic Disorders Ischemic Stroke MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Dementia Genetics Low back pain - acute Stroke Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated April 1, 2011