Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type IE: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type IE URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/hereditary-sensory-and-autonomic-neuropathy-type-ie/ Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type IE To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type IE (HSAN IE) is a disorder that affects the nervous system. It is characterized by three main features: hearing loss, a decline of intellectual function (dementia), and a worsening loss of sensation in the feet and legs (peripheral neuropathy). People with HSAN IE develop hearing loss that is caused by abnormalities in the inner ear (sensorineural hearing loss). The hearing loss, which affects both ears, gets worse over time and usually progresses to moderate or severe deafness between the ages of 20 and 35. Affected individuals experience dementia typically beginning in their thirties. In some people with HSAN IE, changes in personality, such as irritability, apathy, or lack of impulse control, become apparent before problems with thinking skills. Peripheral neuropathy is caused by impaired function of nerve cells called sensory neurons, which transmit information about sensations such as pain, temperature, and touch. Loss of sensation in the feet and legs, which usually begins in adolescence or early adulthood in people with HSAN IE and worsens over time, can cause difficulty walking. Affected individuals may not be aware of injuries to their feet, which can lead to complications such as open sores and infections. If these complications are severe, amputation of the affected areas may be required. Some people with HSAN IE also experience recurrent seizures (epilepsy) and sleep problems. The severity of the signs and symptoms of HSAN IE and their age of onset are variable, even among affected members of the same family. Frequency HSAN IE is a rare disorder; its prevalence is unknown. Small numbers of affected families have been identified in populations around the world. Causes HSAN IE is caused by mutations in the DNMT1 gene, which provides instructions for making an enzyme called DNA methyltransferase 1. This enzyme is involved in DNA methylation, which is the addition of methyl groups, consisting of one carbon atom and three hydrogen atoms, to DNA molecules. DNA methylation is important in many cellular functions. These include determining whether the instructions in a particular segment of DNA are carried out or suppressed (gene silencing), regulating reactions involving proteins and fats (lipids), and controlling the processing of chemicals that relay signals in the nervous system ( neurotransmitters ). DNA methyltransferase 1 is active in the adult nervous system. Although its specific function is not well understood, the enzyme may help regulate neuron maturation and specialization (differentiation), the ability of neurons to migrate where needed and connect with each other, and neuron survival. DNMT1 gene mutations that cause HSAN IE affect the enzyme's methylation function, resulting in abnormalities in the maintenance of the neurons that make up the nervous system. However, it is not known how the mutations cause the specific signs and symptoms of HSAN IE. Learn more about the gene associated with Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type IE DNMT1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent . Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Other Names for This Condition DNMT1-complex disorder DNMT1-related dementia, deafness, and sensory neuropathy Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type 1 with dementia and hearing loss Hereditary sensory neuropathy type IE HSAN1E HSN IE HSNIE Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary sensory neuropathy-deafness-dementia syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Hereditary sensory neuropathy-deafness-dementia syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM NEUROPATHY, HEREDITARY SENSORY, TYPE IE; HSN1E Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Baets J, Duan X, Wu Y, Smith G, Seeley WW, Mademan I, McGrath NM, Beadell NC,
Khoury J, Botuyan MV, Mer G, Worrell GA, Hojo K, DeLeon J, Laura M, Liu YT,
Senderek J, Weis J, Van den Bergh P, Merrill SL, Reilly MM, Houlden H, Grossman
M, Scherer SS, De Jonghe P, Dyck PJ, Klein CJ. Defects of mutant DNMT1 are linked
to a spectrum of neurological disorders. Brain. 2015 Apr;138(Pt 4):845-61. doi:
10.1093/brain/awv010. Epub 2015 Feb 11. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Klein CJ, Bird T, Ertekin-Taner N, Lincoln S, Hjorth R, Wu Y, Kwok J, Mer G,
Dyck PJ, Nicholson GA. DNMT1 mutation hot spot causes varied phenotypes of HSAN1
with dementia and hearing loss. Neurology. 2013 Feb 26;80(9):824-8. doi:
10.1212/WNL.0b013e318284076d. Epub 2013 Jan 30. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Klein CJ, Botuyan MV, Wu Y, Ward CJ, Nicholson GA, Hammans S, Hojo K,
Yamanishi H, Karpf AR, Wallace DC, Simon M, Lander C, Boardman LA, Cunningham JM,
Smith GE, Litchy WJ, Boes B, Atkinson EJ, Middha S, B Dyck PJ, Parisi JE, Mer G,
Smith DI, Dyck PJ. Mutations in DNMT1 cause hereditary sensory neuropathy with
dementia and hearing loss. Nat Genet. 2011 Jun;43(6):595-600. doi:
10.1038/ng.830. Epub 2011 May 1. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Sun Z, Wu Y, Ordog T, Baheti S, Nie J, Duan X, Hojo K, Kocher JP, Dyck PJ,
Klein CJ. Aberrant signature methylome by DNMT1 hot spot mutation in hereditary
sensory and autonomic neuropathy 1E. Epigenetics. 2014 Aug;9(8):1184-93. doi:
10.4161/epi.29676. Epub 2014 Jul 7. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Yuan J, Higuchi Y, Nagado T, Nozuma S, Nakamura T, Matsuura E, Hashiguchi A,
Sakiyama Y, Yoshimura A, Takashima H. Novel mutation in the replication focus
targeting sequence domain of DNMT1 causes hereditary sensory and autonomic
neuropathy IE. J Peripher Nerv Syst. 2013 Mar;18(1):89-93. doi:
10.1111/jns5.12012. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Degenerative Nerve Diseases Dementia Genetic Disorders Hearing Disorders and Deafness Peripheral Nerve Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Dementia Genetics Sensorineural deafness Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 1, 2017