Beta-ureidopropionase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Beta-ureidopropionase deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/beta-ureidopropionase-deficiency/ Beta-ureidopropionase deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Beta-ureidopropionase deficiency is a disorder that causes excessive amounts of molecules called N-carbamyl-beta-aminoisobutyric acid and N-carbamyl-beta-alanine to be released in the urine. Neurological problems ranging from mild to severe also occur in some affected individuals. People with beta-ureidopropionase deficiency can have low muscle tone (hypotonia), seizures, speech difficulties, developmental delay, intellectual disability, and autistic behaviors that affect communication and social interaction. Some people with this condition have an abnormally small head size ( microcephaly ); they may also have brain abnormalities that can be seen with medical imaging. Deterioration of the optic nerve , which carries visual information from the eyes to the brain, can lead to vision loss in this condition. In some people with beta-ureidopropionase deficiency, the disease causes no neurological problems and can only be diagnosed by laboratory testing. Frequency The prevalence of beta-ureidopropionase deficiency is unknown. A small number of affected individuals from populations around the world have been described in the medical literature. In Japan, the prevalence of beta-ureidopropionase deficiency has been estimated as 1 in 6,000 people. Researchers suggest that in many affected individuals with absent or mild neurological problems, the condition may never be diagnosed. Causes Beta-ureidopropionase deficiency is caused by mutations in the UPB1 gene, which provides instructions for making an enzyme called beta-ureidopropionase. This enzyme is involved in the breakdown of molecules called pyrimidines, which are building blocks of DNA and its chemical cousin RNA. The beta-ureidopropionase enzyme is involved in the last step of the process that breaks down pyrimidines. This step converts N-carbamyl-beta-aminoisobutyric acid to beta-aminoisobutyric acid and also breaks down N-carbamyl-beta-alanine to beta-alanine, ammonia, and carbon dioxide. Both beta-aminoisobutyric acid and beta-alanine are thought to play roles in the nervous system. Beta-aminoisobutyric acid increases the production of a protein called leptin, which has been found to help protect brain cells from damage caused by toxins, inflammation, and other factors. Research suggests that beta-alanine is involved in sending signals between nerve cells ( synaptic transmission ) and in controlling the level of a chemical messenger (neurotransmitter) called dopamine . UPB1 gene mutations can reduce or eliminate beta-ureidopropionase enzyme activity. Loss of this enzyme function reduces the production of beta-aminoisobutyric acid and beta-alanine, and leads to an excess of their precursor molecules, N-carbamyl-beta-aminoisobutyric acid and N-carbamyl-beta-alanine, which are released in the urine. Reduced production of beta-aminoisobutyric acid and beta-alanine may impair the function of these molecules in the nervous system, leading to neurological problems in some people with beta-ureidopropionase deficiency. The extent of the reduction in enzyme activity caused by a particular UPB1 gene mutation, along with other genetic and environmental factors, may determine whether people with beta-ureidopropionase deficiency develop neurological problems and the severity of these problems. Learn more about the gene associated with Beta-ureidopropionase deficiency UPB1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Beta-alanine synthase deficiency Deficiency of beta-ureidopropionase Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Deficiency of beta-ureidopropionase Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM BETA-UREIDOPROPIONASE DEFICIENCY; UPB1D Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Nakajima Y, Meijer J, Dobritzsch D, Ito T, Meinsma R, Abeling NG, Roelofsen J,
Zoetekouw L, Watanabe Y, Tashiro K, Lee T, Takeshima Y, Mitsubuchi H, Yoneyama A,
Ohta K, Eto K, Saito K, Kuhara T, van Kuilenburg AB. Clinical, biochemical and
molecular analysis of 13 Japanese patients with beta-ureidopropionase deficiency
demonstrates high prevalence of the c.977G > A (p.R326Q) mutation [corrected].
J Inherit Metab Dis. 2014 Sep;37(5):801-12. doi: 10.1007/s10545-014-9682-y. Epub
2014 Feb 14. Erratum In: J Inherit Metab Dis. 2014 Nov;37(6):1023. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central van Kuilenburg AB, Dobritzsch D, Meijer J, Krumpel M, Selim LA, Rashed MS,
Assmann B, Meinsma R, Lohkamp B, Ito T, Abeling NG, Saito K, Eto K, Smitka M,
Engvall M, Zhang C, Xu W, Zoetekouw L, Hennekam RC. ss-ureidopropionase
deficiency: phenotype, genotype and protein structural consequences in 16
patients. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Jul;1822(7):1096-108. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2012.04.001. Epub 2012 Apr 14. Citation on PubMed van Kuilenburg AB, Meinsma R, Assman B, Hoffman GF, Voit T, Ribes A, Lorente
I, Busch R, Mayatepek E, Abeling NG, Wevers RA, Rutsch F, van Gennip AH. Genetic
analysis of the first 4 patients with beta-ureidopropionase deficiency.
Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids. 2006;25(9-11):1093-8. doi:
10.1080/15257770600956870. Citation on PubMed van Kuilenburg AB, Meinsma R, Beke E, Assmann B, Ribes A, Lorente I, Busch R,
Mayatepek E, Abeling NG, van Cruchten A, Stroomer AE, van Lenthe H, Zoetekouw L,
Kulik W, Hoffmann GF, Voit T, Wevers RA, Rutsch F, van Gennip AH.
beta-Ureidopropionase deficiency: an inborn error of pyrimidine degradation
associated with neurological abnormalities. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Nov
15;13(22):2793-801. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddh303. Epub 2004 Sep 22. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Metabolic Disorders Optic Nerve Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2014