Bowen-Conradi syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Bowen-Conradi syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/bowen-conradi-syndrome/ Bowen-Conradi syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Bowen-Conradi syndrome is a disorder that affects many parts of the body and is usually fatal in infancy. Affected individuals have a low birth weight, experience feeding problems, and grow very slowly. Their head is unusually small overall ( microcephaly ), but is longer than expected compared with its width ( dolichocephaly ). Characteristic facial features include a prominent , high-bridged nose and an unusually small jaw ( micrognathia ) and chin. Affected individuals typically have pinky fingers that are curved toward or away from the ring finger (fifth finger clinodactyly ) or permanently flexed ( camptodactyly ), feet with soles that are rounded outward ( rocker-bottom feet ), and restricted joint movement. Other features that occur in some affected individuals include seizures; structural abnormalities of the kidneys, heart, brain, or other organs; and an opening in the lip ( cleft lip ) with or without an opening in the roof of the mouth ( cleft palate) . Affected males may have the opening of the urethra on the underside of the penis (hypospadias) or undescended testes (cryptorchidism). Babies with Bowen-Conradi syndrome do not achieve developmental milestones such as smiling or sitting, and they usually do not survive more than 6 months. Frequency Bowen-Conradi syndrome is common in the Hutterite population in Canada and the United States; it occurs in approximately 1 per 355 newborns in all three Hutterite sects (leuts). A few individuals from outside the Hutterite community with signs and symptoms similar to Bowen-Conradi syndrome have been described in the medical literature. Researchers differ as to whether these individuals have Bowen-Conradi syndrome or a similar but distinct disorder. Causes Bowen-Conradi syndrome is caused by a mutation in the EMG1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is involved in the production of cellular structures called ribosomes , which process the cell's genetic instructions to create new proteins. Ribosomes are assembled in a cell compartment called the nucleolus . The particular EMG1 gene mutation known to cause Bowen-Conradi syndrome is thought to make the protein unstable, resulting in a decrease in the amount of EMG1 protein that is available in the nucleolus. A shortage of this protein in the nucleolus would impair ribosome production, which may reduce cell growth and division (proliferation); however, it is unknown how EMG1 gene mutations lead to the particular signs and symptoms of Bowen-Conradi syndrome. Learn more about the gene associated with Bowen-Conradi syndrome EMG1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Bowen Hutterite syndrome Bowen syndrome, Hutterite type Bowen-Conradi Hutterite syndrome BWCNS Hutterite syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Bowen-Conradi syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Bowen-Conradi syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM BOWEN-CONRADI SYNDROME; BWCNS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Armistead J, Khatkar S, Meyer B, Mark BL, Patel N, Coghlan G, Lamont RE, Liu
S, Wiechert J, Cattini PA, Koetter P, Wrogemann K, Greenberg CR, Entian KD,
Zelinski T, Triggs-Raine B. Mutation of a gene essential for ribosome biogenesis,
EMG1, causes Bowen-Conradi syndrome. Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Jun;84(6):728-39. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.04.017. Epub 2009 May 21. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Armistead J, Patel N, Wu X, Hemming R, Chowdhury B, Basra GS, Del Bigio MR,
Ding H, Triggs-Raine B. Growth arrest in the ribosomopathy, Bowen-Conradi
syndrome, is due to dramatically reduced cell proliferation and a defect in
mitotic progression. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 May;1852(5):1029-37. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2015.02.007. Epub 2015 Feb 20. Citation on PubMed Armistead J, Triggs-Raine B. Diverse diseases from a ubiquitous process: the
ribosomopathy paradox. FEBS Lett. 2014 May 2;588(9):1491-500. doi:
10.1016/j.febslet.2014.03.024. Epub 2014 Mar 19. Citation on PubMed Lamont RE, Loredo-Osti J, Roslin NM, Mauthe J, Coghlan G, Nylen E, Frappier D,
Innes AM, Lemire EG, Lowry RB, Greenberg CR, Triggs-Raine BL, Morgan K, Wrogemann
K, Fujiwara TM, Zelinski T. A locus for Bowen-Conradi syndrome maps to chromosome
region 12p13.3. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Jan 15;132A(2):136-43. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.30420. Citation on PubMed Lowry RB, Innes AM, Bernier FP, McLeod DR, Greenberg CR, Chudley AE, Chodirker
B, Marles SL, Crumley MJ, Loredo-Osti JC, Morgan K, Fujiwara TM. Bowen-Conradi
syndrome: a clinical and genetic study. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Jul
30;120A(3):423-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20059. Citation on PubMed Sondalle SB, Baserga SJ. Human diseases of the SSU processome. Biochim Biophys
Acta. 2014 Jun;1842(6):758-64. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.11.004. Epub 2013 Nov
12. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Craniofacial Abnormalities Developmental Disabilities Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Failure to thrive Feeding tube - infants Genetics Micrognathia Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2015