Chediak-Higashi syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Chediak-Higashi syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/chediak-higashi-syndrome/ Chediak-Higashi syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Chediak-Higashi syndrome is a condition that affects many parts of the body, particularly the immune system. This disease damages immune system cells, leaving them less able to fight off invaders such as viruses and bacteria. As a result, most people with Chediak-Higashi syndrome have repeated and persistent infections starting in infancy or early childhood. These infections tend to be very serious or life-threatening. Chediak-Higashi syndrome is also characterized by a condition called oculocutaneous albinism , which causes abnormally light coloring (pigmentation) of the skin, hair, and eyes. Affected individuals typically have fair skin and light-colored hair , often with a metallic sheen. Oculocutaneous albinism also causes vision problems such as reduced sharpness; rapid, involuntary eye movements (nystagmus); and increased sensitivity to light (photophobia). Many people with Chediak-Higashi syndrome have problems with blood clotting (coagulation) that lead to easy bruising and abnormal bleeding. In adulthood, Chediak-Higashi syndrome can also affect the nervous system, causing weakness, clumsiness, difficulty with walking, and seizures. If the disease is not successfully treated, most children with Chediak-Higashi syndrome reach a stage of the disorder known as the accelerated phase. This severe phase of the disease is thought to be triggered by a viral infection. In the accelerated phase, white blood cells (which normally help fight infection) divide uncontrollably and invade many of the body's organs. The accelerated phase is associated with fever, episodes of abnormal bleeding, overwhelming infections, and organ failure. These medical problems are usually life-threatening in childhood. A small percentage of people with Chediak-Higashi syndrome have a milder form of the condition that appears later in life. People with the adult form of the disorder have less noticeable changes in pigmentation and are less likely to have recurrent, severe infections. They do, however, have a significant risk of progressive neurological problems such as tremors, difficulty with movement and balance (ataxia), reduced sensation and weakness in the arms and legs (peripheral neuropathy), and a decline in intellectual functioning. Frequency Chediak-Higashi syndrome is a rare disorder. About 200 cases of the condition have been reported worldwide. Causes Chediak-Higashi syndrome is caused by mutations in the LYST gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein known as the lysosomal trafficking regulator. Researchers believe that this protein plays a role in the transport (trafficking) of materials into structures called lysosomes and similar cell structures. Lysosomes act as recycling centers within cells. They use digestive enzymes to break down toxic substances, digest bacteria that invade the cell, and recycle worn-out cell components. Mutations in the LYST gene impair the normal function of the lysosomal trafficking regulator protein, which disrupts the size, structure, and function of lysosomes and related structures in cells throughout the body. In many cells, the lysosomes are abnormally large and interfere with normal cell functions.  For example, enlarged lysosomes in certain immune system cells prevent these cells from responding appropriately to bacteria and other foreign invaders. As a result, the malfunctioning immune system cannot protect the body from infections. In pigment cells called melanocytes , cellular structures called melanosomes (which are related to lysosomes) are abnormally large. Melanosomes produce and distribute a pigment called melanin, which is the substance that gives skin, hair, and eyes their color. People with Chediak-Higashi syndrome have oculocutaneous albinism because melanin is trapped within the giant melanosomes and is unable to contribute to skin, hair, and eye pigmentation. Researchers believe that abnormal lysosome-like structures inside blood cells called platelets underlie the abnormal bruising and bleeding seen in people with Chediak-Higashi syndrome. Similarly, abnormal lysosomes in nerve cells probably cause the neurological problems associated with this disease. Learn more about the gene associated with Chediak-Higashi syndrome LYST Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Chediak-Steinbrinck-Higashi syndrome CHS Oculocutaneous albinism with leukocyte defect Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Chédiak-Higashi syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Chédiak-Higashi syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CHEDIAK-HIGASHI SYNDROME; CHS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Huizing M, Anikster Y, Gahl WA. Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome and Chediak-Higashi
syndrome: disorders of vesicle formation and trafficking. Thromb Haemost. 2001
Jul;86(1):233-45. Citation on PubMed Introne W, Boissy RE, Gahl WA. Clinical, molecular, and cell biological
aspects of Chediak-Higashi syndrome. Mol Genet Metab. 1999 Oct;68(2):283-303.
doi: 10.1006/mgme.1999.2927. Citation on PubMed Kaplan J, De Domenico I, Ward DM. Chediak-Higashi syndrome. Curr Opin Hematol.
2008 Jan;15(1):22-9. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0b013e3282f2bcce. Citation on PubMed Karim MA, Suzuki K, Fukai K, Oh J, Nagle DL, Moore KJ, Barbosa E,
Falik-Borenstein T, Filipovich A, Ishida Y, Kivrikko S, Klein C, Kreuz F, Levin
A, Miyajima H, Regueiro JR, Russo C, Uyama E, Vierimaa O, Spritz RA. Apparent
genotype-phenotype correlation in childhood, adolescent, and adult
Chediak-Higashi syndrome. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Feb 15;108(1):16-22. Citation on PubMed Ward DM, Shiflett SL, Kaplan J. Chediak-Higashi syndrome: a clinical and
molecular view of a rare lysosomal storage disorder. Curr Mol Med. 2002
Aug;2(5):469-77. doi: 10.2174/1566524023362339. Citation on PubMed Westbroek W, Adams D, Huizing M, Koshoffer A, Dorward H, Tinloy B, Parkes J,
Helip-Wooley A, Kleta R, Tsilou E, Duvernay P, Digre KB, Creel DJ, White JG,
Boissy RE, Gahl WA. Cellular defects in Chediak-Higashi syndrome correlate with
the molecular genotype and clinical phenotype. J Invest Dermatol. 2007
Nov;127(11):2674-7. doi: 10.1038/sj.jid.5700899. Epub 2007 May 31. No abstract
available. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Immune System and Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Albinism Chediak-Higashi syndrome Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated January 1, 2014