Spastic paraplegia type 31: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Spastic paraplegia type 31 URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/spastic-paraplegia-type-31/ Spastic paraplegia type 31 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Spastic paraplegia type 31 is one of a group of genetic disorders known as hereditary spastic paraplegias. These disorders are characterized by progressive muscle stiffness (spasticity) and the development of paralysis of the lower limbs (paraplegia) caused by degeneration of nerve cells that trigger muscle movement (motor neurons). Hereditary spastic paraplegias are divided into two types: pure and complicated. The pure types involve only the lower limbs, while the complicated types also involve the upper limbs and other areas of the body, including the brain. Spastic paraplegia type 31 is usually a pure hereditary spastic paraplegia, although a few complicated cases have been reported. The first signs and symptoms of spastic paraplegia type 31 usually appear before age 20 or after age 30. An early feature is difficulty walking due to spasticity and weakness, which typically affect both legs equally. People with spastic paraplegia type 31 can also experience progressive muscle wasting (amyotrophy) in the lower limbs, exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia), a decreased ability to feel vibrations, reduced bladder control, and high-arched feet ( pes cavus ). As the condition progresses, some individuals require walking support. Frequency Spastic paraplegia type 31 is one of a subgroup of hereditary spastic paraplegias known as autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia, which has an estimated prevalence of one to 12 per 100,000 individuals. Spastic paraplegia type 31 accounts for 3 to 9 percent of all autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia cases. Causes Spastic paraplegia type 31 is caused by mutations in the REEP1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called receptor expression-enhancing protein 1 (REEP1), which is found in neurons in the brain and spinal cord. The REEP1 protein is located within cell compartments called mitochondria , which are the energy-producing centers in cells, and the endoplasmic reticulum , which helps with protein processing and transport. The REEP1 protein plays a role in regulating the size of the endoplasmic reticulum and determining how many proteins it can process. The function of the REEP1 protein in the mitochondria is unknown. REEP1 gene mutations that cause spastic paraplegia type 31 result in a short, nonfunctional protein that is usually broken down quickly. As a result, there is a reduction in functional REEP1 protein. It is unclear how REEP1 gene mutations lead to the signs and symptoms of spastic paraplegia type 31. Researchers have shown that mitochondria in cells of affected individuals are less able to produce energy, which may contribute to the death of neurons and lead to the progressive movement problems of spastic paraplegia type 31; however, the exact mechanism that causes this condition is unknown. Learn more about the gene associated with Spastic paraplegia type 31 REEP1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition Autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia 31 Spastic paraplegia 31 SPG31 Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary spastic paraplegia 31 Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary spastic paraplegia Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia type 31 Hereditary spastic paraplegia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 31, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT; SPG31 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Beetz C, Schule R, Deconinck T, Tran-Viet KN, Zhu H, Kremer BP, Frints SG, van
Zelst-Stams WA, Byrne P, Otto S, Nygren AO, Baets J, Smets K, Ceulemans B, Dan B,
Nagan N, Kassubek J, Klimpe S, Klopstock T, Stolze H, Smeets HJ,
Schrander-Stumpel CT, Hutchinson M, van de Warrenburg BP, Braastad C, Deufel T,
Pericak-Vance M, Schols L, de Jonghe P, Zuchner S. REEP1 mutation spectrum and
genotype/phenotype correlation in hereditary spastic paraplegia type 31. Brain.
2008 Apr;131(Pt 4):1078-86. doi: 10.1093/brain/awn026. Epub 2008 Mar 5. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Goizet C, Depienne C, Benard G, Boukhris A, Mundwiller E, Sole G, Coupry I,
Pilliod J, Martin-Negrier ML, Fedirko E, Forlani S, Cazeneuve C, Hannequin D,
Charles P, Feki I, Pinel JF, Ouvrard-Hernandez AM, Lyonnet S, Ollagnon-Roman E,
Yaouanq J, Toutain A, Dussert C, Fontaine B, Leguern E, Lacombe D, Durr A,
Rossignol R, Brice A, Stevanin G. REEP1 mutations in SPG31: frequency, mutational
spectrum, and potential association with mitochondrial morpho-functional
dysfunction. Hum Mutat. 2011 Oct;32(10):1118-27. doi: 10.1002/humu.21542. Epub
2011 Sep 9. Citation on PubMed Hewamadduma C, McDermott C, Kirby J, Grierson A, Panayi M, Dalton A, Rajabally
Y, Shaw P. New pedigrees and novel mutation expand the phenotype of
REEP1-associated hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP). Neurogenetics. 2009
Apr;10(2):105-10. doi: 10.1007/s10048-008-0163-z. Epub 2008 Nov 26. Citation on PubMed Zuchner S, Wang G, Tran-Viet KN, Nance MA, Gaskell PC, Vance JM, Ashley-Koch
AE, Pericak-Vance MA. Mutations in the novel mitochondrial protein REEP1 cause
hereditary spastic paraplegia type 31. Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Aug;79(2):365-9. doi:
10.1086/505361. Epub 2006 May 26. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Neurologic Diseases Neuromuscular Disorders Paralysis MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated April 1, 2015