Kearns-Sayre syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Kearns-Sayre syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/kearns-sayre-syndrome/ Kearns-Sayre syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Kearns-Sayre syndrome is a condition that affects many parts of the body, especially the eyes. The features of Kearns-Sayre syndrome usually appear before age 20, and the condition is diagnosed by a few characteristic signs and symptoms. People with Kearns-Sayre syndrome have progressive external ophthalmoplegia , which is weakness or paralysis of the eye muscles that impairs eye movement and causes drooping eyelids ( ptosis ). Affected individuals also have an eye condition called pigmentary retinopathy, which results from breakdown (degeneration) of the light-sensing tissue at the back of the eye (the retina ) that gives it a speckled and streaked appearance. The retinopathy may cause loss of vision. In addition, people with Kearns-Sayre syndrome have at least one of the following signs or symptoms: abnormalities of the electrical signals that control the heartbeat (cardiac conduction defects), problems with coordination and balance that cause unsteadiness while walking (ataxia), or abnormally high levels of protein in the fluid that surrounds and protects the brain and spinal cord (the cerebrospinal fluid or CSF). People with Kearns-Sayre syndrome may also experience muscle weakness in their limbs, deafness, kidney problems, or a deterioration of cognitive functions (dementia). Affected individuals often have short stature. In addition, diabetes mellitus is occasionally seen in people with Kearns-Sayre syndrome. When the muscle cells of affected individuals are stained and viewed under a microscope, these cells usually appear abnormal. The abnormal muscle cells contain an excess of structures called mitochondria and are known as ragged-red fibers. A related condition called ophthalmoplegia-plus may be diagnosed if an individual has many of the signs and symptoms of Kearns-Sayre syndrome but not all the criteria are met. Frequency The prevalence of Kearns-Sayre syndrome is approximately 1 to 3 per 100,000 individuals. Causes Kearns-Sayre syndrome is a condition caused by defects in mitochondria , which are structures within cells that use oxygen to convert the energy from food into a form cells can use. This process is called oxidative phosphorylation . Although most DNA is packaged in chromosomes within the nucleus (nuclear DNA), mitochondria also have a small amount of their own DNA, called mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). This type of DNA contains many genes essential for normal mitochondrial function. People with Kearns-Sayre syndrome have a single, large deletion of mtDNA, ranging from 1,000 to 10,000 DNA building blocks (nucleotides). The cause of the deletion in affected individuals is unknown. The mtDNA deletions that cause Kearns-Sayre syndrome result in the loss of genes important for mitochondrial protein formation and oxidative phosphorylation. The most common deletion removes 4,997 nucleotides, which includes twelve mitochondrial genes. Deletions of mtDNA result in impairment of oxidative phosphorylation and a decrease in cellular energy production. Regardless of which genes are deleted, all steps of oxidative phosphorylation are affected. Researchers have not determined how these deletions lead to the specific signs and symptoms of Kearns-Sayre syndrome, although the features of the condition are probably related to a lack of cellular energy. It has been suggested that eyes are commonly affected by mitochondrial defects because they are especially dependent on mitochondria for energy. Learn more about the chromosome associated with Kearns-Sayre syndrome mitochondrial dna Inheritance This condition is generally not inherited but arises from mutations in the body's cells that occur after conception. This alteration is called a somatic mutation and is present only in certain cells. Rarely, this condition is inherited in a mitochondrial pattern , which is also known as maternal inheritance. This pattern of inheritance applies to genes contained in mtDNA. Because egg cells, but not sperm cells, contribute mitochondria to the developing embryo, children can only inherit disorders resulting from mtDNA mutations from their mother. These disorders can appear in every generation of a family and can affect both males and females, but fathers do not pass traits associated with changes in mtDNA to their children. Other Names for This Condition Kearns-Sayre mitochondrial cytopathy KSS Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Kearns-Sayre syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Kearns-Sayre syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM KEARNS-SAYRE SYNDROME; KSS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Goldstein A, Falk MJ. Single Large-Scale Mitochondrial DNA Deletion Syndromes.
2003 Dec 17 [updated 2023 Sep 28]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA,
Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA):
University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1203/ Citation on PubMed Graeber MB, Muller U. Recent developments in the molecular genetics of
mitochondrial disorders. J Neurol Sci. 1998 Jan 8;153(2):251-63. doi:
10.1016/s0022-510x(97)00295-5. Citation on PubMed Porteous WK, James AM, Sheard PW, Porteous CM, Packer MA, Hyslop SJ, Melton
JV, Pang CY, Wei YH, Murphy MP. Bioenergetic consequences of accumulating the
common 4977-bp mitochondrial DNA deletion. Eur J Biochem. 1998 Oct
1;257(1):192-201. doi: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.1998.2570192.x. Citation on PubMed Schroder R, Vielhaber S, Wiedemann FR, Kornblum C, Papassotiropoulos A, Broich
P, Zierz S, Elger CE, Reichmann H, Seibel P, Klockgether T, Kunz WS. New insights
into the metabolic consequences of large-scale mtDNA deletions: a quantitative
analysis of biochemical, morphological, and genetic findings in human skeletal
muscle. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2000 May;59(5):353-60. doi:
10.1093/jnen/59.5.353. Citation on PubMed Sciacco M, Bonilla E, Schon EA, DiMauro S, Moraes CT. Distribution of
wild-type and common deletion forms of mtDNA in normal and respiration-deficient
muscle fibers from patients with mitochondrial myopathy. Hum Mol Genet. 1994
Jan;3(1):13-9. doi: 10.1093/hmg/3.1.13. Erratum In: Hum Mol Genet 1994
Apr;3(4):687. Citation on PubMed Yamashita S, Nishino I, Nonaka I, Goto YI. Genotype and phenotype analyses in
136 patients with single large-scale mitochondrial DNA deletions. J Hum Genet.
2008;53(7):598. doi: 10.1007/s10038-008-0289-8. Epub 2008 Apr 15. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Eye Diseases Genetic Disorders Heart Diseases Retinal Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) collection Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 1, 2011