Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/familial-exudative-vitreoretinopathy/ Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy is a hereditary disorder that can cause vision loss that worsens over time. This condition affects the retina, the specialized light-sensitive tissue that lines the back of the eye. In people with this disorder, blood vessels do not fully develop at the outer edges (periphery) of the retina, which reduces the blood supply to this tissue. This prolonged reduction in blood supply (chronic ischemia) causes continued damage to the retina and can lead to worsening of the condition. The signs and symptoms of familial exudative vitreoretinopathy vary widely, even within the same family. In many affected individuals, the retinal abnormalities never cause any vision problems. Other people with this condition develop abnormal vessels that leak. This  causes chronic inflammation which, over time, can lead to fluid under the retina (exudate). A reduction in the retina's blood supply causes the retina to fold, tear, or separate from the back of the eye ( retinal detachment ). The resulting retinal damage can lead to vision loss and blindness. Other eye abnormalities are also possible, including eyes that do not look in the same direction (strabismus) and a visible whiteness (leukocoria) in the normally black pupil. Some people with familial exudative vitreoretinopathy also have a condition known as osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome , which is characterized by reduced bone density. People with this condition have weakened bones and an increased  risk of fractures. Frequency The prevalence of familial exudative vitreoretinopathy is unknown.  It is thought to be rare, although affected people with normal vision may never receive a diagnosis. Causes Variants (also called mutations) in the FZD4 , LRP5 , and NDP genes cause most cases of  familial exudative vitreoretinopathy. These genes provide instructions for making proteins that participate in a chemical signaling pathway that affects the way cells and tissues develop. In particular, the proteins produced from the FZD4 , LRP5 , and NDP genes appear to play critical roles in the specialization of retinal cells and the formation of blood vessels in the retina and the inner ear. The LRP5 protein also helps regulate bone formation. Variants in the FZD4 , LRP5 , or NDP gene disrupt chemical signaling during early development, which interferes with the formation of blood vessels at the periphery of the retina. The resulting abnormal blood supply to this tissue leads to retinal damage and vision loss in some people with familial exudative vitreoretinopathy. The eye abnormalities associated with familial exudative vitreoretinopathy tend to be similar no matter which gene is altered. However, affected individuals with LRP5 gene variants often have reduced bone mineral density in addition to vision loss. Variants in the other genes responsible for familial exudative vitreoretinopathy do not appear to affect bone density. Variants in other genes  each cause a small number of cases of familial exudative vitreoretinopathy. In other cases, the cause of familial exudative vitreoretinopathy is unknown. Learn more about the genes associated with Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy CTNNB1 FZD4 LRP5 NDP Additional Information from NCBI Gene: KIF11 TSPAN12 ZNF408 Inheritance Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy has different inheritance patterns depending on the gene involved. Most commonly, the condition results from variants in the FZD4 or LRP5 gene and has an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance.  Autosomal dominant inheritance means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Most people with autosomal dominant familial exudative vitreoretinopathy inherit the altered gene from a parent, although the parent may not have any signs or symptoms associated with this disorder. Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy caused by LRP5 gene variants can also have an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance.  Autosomal recessive inheritance  means both copies of the gene in each cell must have a variant to cause the disorder. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. When familial exudative vitreoretinopathy is caused by variants in the NDP gene, it has an X-linked recessive pattern of inheritance. The NDP gene is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes . In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a variant would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of the gene, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons. Other Names for This Condition FEVR Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Exudative vitreoretinopathy 1 Genetic Testing Registry: Exudative vitreoretinopathy 4 Genetic Testing Registry: Exudative vitreoretinopathy 5 Genetic Testing Registry: Exudative vitreoretinopathy 6 Genetic Testing Registry: Exudative vitreoretinopathy 2, X-linked Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 1; EVR1 EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 2, X-LINKED; EVR2 EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 4; EVR4 EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 3; EVR3 EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 6; EVR6 EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 5; EVR5 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Dickinson JL, Sale MM, Passmore A, FitzGerald LM, Wheatley CM, Burdon KP,
Craig JE, Tengtrisorn S, Carden SM, Maclean H, Mackey DA. Mutations in the NDP
gene: contribution to Norrie disease, familial exudative vitreoretinopathy and
retinopathy of prematurity. Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2006 Sep-Oct;34(7):682-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1442-9071.2006.01314.x. Citation on PubMed Jiao X, Ventruto V, Trese MT, Shastry BS, Hejtmancik JF. Autosomal recessive
familial exudative vitreoretinopathy is associated with mutations in LRP5. Am J
Hum Genet. 2004 Nov;75(5):878-84. doi: 10.1086/425080. Epub 2004 Sep 2. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Qin M, Hayashi H, Oshima K, Tahira T, Hayashi K, Kondo H. Complexity of the
genotype-phenotype correlation in familial exudative vitreoretinopathy with
mutations in the LRP5 and/or FZD4 genes. Hum Mutat. 2005 Aug;26(2):104-12. doi:
10.1002/humu.20191. Citation on PubMed Robitaille J, MacDonald ML, Kaykas A, Sheldahl LC, Zeisler J, Dube MP, Zhang
LH, Singaraja RR, Guernsey DL, Zheng B, Siebert LF, Hoskin-Mott A, Trese MT,
Pimstone SN, Shastry BS, Moon RT, Hayden MR, Goldberg YP, Samuels ME. Mutant
frizzled-4 disrupts retinal angiogenesis in familial exudative vitreoretinopathy.
Nat Genet. 2002 Oct;32(2):326-30. doi: 10.1038/ng957. Epub 2002 Aug 12. Citation on PubMed Scruggs BA, Reding MQ, Schimmenti LA. NDP-Related Retinopathies. 1999
Jul 30 [updated 2023 Mar 23]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA,
Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA):
University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1331/ Citation on PubMed Shukla D, Singh J, Sudheer G, Soman M, John RK, Ramasamy K, Perumalsamy N.
Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (FEVR). Clinical profile and management.
Indian J Ophthalmol. 2003 Dec;51(4):323-8. Citation on PubMed Tao T, Xu N, Li J, Li H, Qu J, Yin H, Liang J, Zhao M, Li X, Huang L. Ocular
Features and Mutation Spectrum of Patients With Familial Exudative
Vitreoretinopathy. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2021 Dec 1;62(15):4. doi:
10.1167/iovs.62.15.4. Citation on PubMed Toomes C, Bottomley HM, Jackson RM, Towns KV, Scott S, Mackey DA, Craig JE,
Jiang L, Yang Z, Trembath R, Woodruff G, Gregory-Evans CY, Gregory-Evans K,
Parker MJ, Black GC, Downey LM, Zhang K, Inglehearn CF. Mutations in LRP5 or FZD4
underlie the common familial exudative vitreoretinopathy locus on chromosome 11q.
Am J Hum Genet. 2004 Apr;74(4):721-30. doi: 10.1086/383202. Epub 2004 Mar 11. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Warden SM, Andreoli CM, Mukai S. The Wnt signaling pathway in familial
exudative vitreoretinopathy and Norrie disease. Semin Ophthalmol. 2007
Oct-Dec;22(4):211-7. doi: 10.1080/08820530701745124. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Retinal Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 5, 2024