Maternally inherited diabetes and deafness: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Maternally inherited diabetes and deafness URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/maternally-inherited-diabetes-and-deafness/ Maternally inherited diabetes and deafness To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Maternally inherited diabetes and deafness (MIDD) is a form of diabetes that is often accompanied by hearing loss, especially of high tones. The diabetes in MIDD is characterized by high blood sugar (glucose) levels, known as hyperglycemia. This results from a shortage of the hormone insulin, which regulates the amount of glucose in the blood. In MIDD, the diabetes and hearing loss usually develop in mid-adulthood, although the age that they occur varies from childhood to late adulthood. Typically, hearing loss occurs before diabetes. Some people with MIDD develop an eye disorder called macular retinal dystrophy, which is characterized by colored patches in the light-sensitive tissue that lines the back of the eye (the retina ). This disorder does not usually cause vision problems in people with MIDD. Individuals with MIDD also may experience muscle cramps or weakness, particularly during exercise; heart problems; kidney disease; and constipation. Individuals with MIDD are often shorter than their peers. Frequency About 1 percent of people with diabetes have MIDD. The condition is most common in the Japanese population and has been found in populations worldwide. Causes Mutations in the MT-TL1 , MT-TK , or MT-TE gene cause MIDD. These genes are found in mitochondrial DNA, which is part of cellular structures called mitochondria . Although most DNA is packaged in chromosomes within the cell nucleus , mitochondria also have a small amount of their own DNA (known as mitochondrial DNA or mtDNA). The MT-TL1 , MT-TK , and MT-TE genes provide instructions for making molecules called transfer RNAs (tRNAs), which are chemical cousins of DNA. These molecules help assemble protein building blocks ( amino acids ) into functioning proteins. The MT-TL1 gene provides instructions for making a specific form of tRNA that is designated as tRNA Leu(UUR) . During protein assembly, this molecule attaches to the amino acid leucine (Leu) and inserts it into the appropriate locations in the growing protein. Similarly, the protein produced from the MT-TK gene, called tRNA Lys , attaches to the amino acid lysine (Lys) and inserts it into proteins being assembled. Also, the protein produced from the MT-TE gene, called tRNA Glu , attaches to the amino acid glutamic acid (Glu) and adds it to growing proteins. These tRNA molecules are present only in mitochondria, and they help assemble proteins that are involved in producing energy for cells. In certain cells in the pancreas called beta cells, mitochondria also play a role in controlling the amount of glucose in the bloodstream. In response to high glucose levels, mitochondria help trigger the release of insulin , which stimulates cells to take up glucose from the blood. Mutations in the MT-TL1 , MT-TK , or MT-TE gene reduce the ability of tRNA to add amino acids to growing proteins, which slows protein production in mitochondria and impairs their functioning. Researchers believe that the disruption of mitochondrial function lessens the ability of mitochondria to help trigger insulin release. In people with this condition, diabetes results when the beta cells do not produce enough insulin to regulate blood glucose effectively. Researchers have not determined how the mutations lead to hearing loss or the other features of MIDD. Learn more about the genes and chromosome associated with Maternally inherited diabetes and deafness MT-TE MT-TK MT-TL1 mitochondrial dna Inheritance MIDD is inherited in a mitochondrial pattern , which is also known as maternal inheritance. This pattern of inheritance applies to genes contained in mtDNA. Because egg cells, but not sperm cells, contribute mitochondria to the developing embryo, children can only inherit disorders resulting from mtDNA mutations from their mother. These disorders can appear in every generation of a family and can affect both males and females, but fathers do not pass traits associated with changes in mtDNA to their children. Most of the body's cells contain thousands of mitochondria, each with one or more copies of mtDNA. These cells can have a mix of mitochondria containing mutated and unmutated DNA (heteroplasmy). The severity of MIDD is thought to be associated with the percentage of mitochondria with the mtDNA mutation. Other Names for This Condition Ballinger-Wallace syndrome Diabetes mellitus, type II, with deafness Maternally transmitted diabetes-deafness syndrome MIDD Mitochondrial inherited diabetes and deafness NIDDM with deafness Noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with deafness Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Diabetes-deafness syndrome maternally transmitted Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Maternally-inherited diabetes and deafness Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM DIABETES AND DEAFNESS, MATERNALLY INHERITED; MIDD Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Kameoka K, Isotani H, Tanaka K, Kitaoka H, Ohsawa N. Impaired insulin
secretion in Japanese diabetic subjects with an A-to-G mutation at nucleotide
8296 of the mitochondrial DNA in tRNA(Lys). Diabetes Care. 1998
Nov;21(11):2034-5. doi: 10.2337/diacare.21.11.2034. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Maassen JA, Jahangir Tafrechi RS, Janssen GM, Raap AK, Lemkes HH, 't Hart LM.
New insights in the molecular pathogenesis of the maternally inherited diabetes
and deafness syndrome. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2006 Jun;35(2):385-96,
x-xi. doi: 10.1016/j.ecl.2006.02.014. Citation on PubMed Murphy R, Turnbull DM, Walker M, Hattersley AT. Clinical features, diagnosis
and management of maternally inherited diabetes and deafness (MIDD) associated
with the 3243A>G mitochondrial point mutation. Diabet Med. 2008
Apr;25(4):383-99. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2008.02359.x. Epub 2008 Feb 18. Citation on PubMed Supale S, Li N, Brun T, Maechler P. Mitochondrial dysfunction in pancreatic beta
cells. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Sep;23(9):477-87. doi:
10.1016/j.tem.2012.06.002. Epub 2012 Jul 4. Citation on PubMed van den Ouweland JM, Lemkes HH, Ruitenbeek W, Sandkuijl LA, de Vijlder MF,
Struyvenberg PA, van de Kamp JJ, Maassen JA. Mutation in mitochondrial
tRNA(Leu)(UUR) gene in a large pedigree with maternally transmitted type II
diabetes mellitus and deafness. Nat Genet. 1992 Aug;1(5):368-71. doi:
10.1038/ng0892-368. Citation on PubMed Vialettes BH, Paquis-Flucklinger V, Pelissier JF, Bendahan D, Narbonne H,
Silvestre-Aillaud P, Montfort MF, Righini-Chossegros M, Pouget J, Cozzone PJ,
Desnuelle C. Phenotypic expression of diabetes secondary to a T14709C mutation of
mitochondrial DNA. Comparison with MIDD syndrome (A3243G mutation): a case
report. Diabetes Care. 1997 Nov;20(11):1731-7. doi: 10.2337/diacare.20.11.1731. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Diabetes Genetic Disorders Mitochondrial Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Hearing loss Living with hearing loss Related Medical Tests Blood Glucose Test Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated October 1, 2012