Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/birt-hogg-dube-syndrome/ Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome is a rare disorder that affects the skin and lungs and increases the risk of certain types of tumors. Its signs and symptoms vary among affected individuals. Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome is characterized by multiple noncancerous (benign) skin tumors, particularly on the face, neck, and upper chest. These growths typically first appear in a person's twenties or thirties and become larger and more numerous over time. Affected individuals also have an increased chance of developing cysts in the lungs and an abnormal accumulation of air in the chest cavity (pneumothorax) that may result in the collapse of a lung. Additionally, Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome is associated with an elevated risk of developing cancerous or noncancerous kidney tumors. Other types of cancer have also been reported in affected individuals, but it is unclear whether these tumors are actually a feature of Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome. Frequency Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome is rare; its exact incidence is unknown.  This condition has been reported in more than 400 families. Causes Mutations in the FLCN gene cause Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called folliculin. The normal function of this protein is unknown, but researchers believe that it may act as a tumor suppressor. Tumor suppressors prevent cells from growing and dividing too rapidly or in an uncontrolled way. Mutations in the FLCN gene may interfere with the ability of folliculin to restrain cell growth and division, leading to uncontrolled cell growth and the formation of noncancerous and cancerous tumors. Researchers have not determined how FLCN mutations increase the risk of lung problems, such as pneumothorax. Learn more about the gene associated with Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome FLCN Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered FLCN gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent . Less commonly, the condition results from a new mutation in the gene and occurs in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Having a single mutated copy of the FLCN gene in each cell is enough to cause the skin tumors and lung problems associated with Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome. However, both copies of the FLCN gene are often mutated in the kidney tumors that occur with this condition. One of the mutations is inherited from a parent, while the other occurs by chance in a kidney cell during a person's lifetime. These genetic changes disable both copies of the FLCN gene, which allows kidney cells to divide uncontrollably and form tumors. Other Names for This Condition BHD Fibrofolliculomas with trichodiscomas and acrochordons Hornstein-Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome Hornstein-Knickenberg syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM BIRT-HOGG-DUBE SYNDROME 1; BHD1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Happle R. Hornstein-Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome: a renaming and reconsideration.
Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Jun;158A(6):1247-51. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35330. Epub 2012
May 11. Citation on PubMed Khoo SK, Giraud S, Kahnoski K, Chen J, Motorna O, Nickolov R, Binet O, Lambert
D, Friedel J, Levy R, Ferlicot S, Wolkenstein P, Hammel P, Bergerheim U, Hedblad
MA, Bradley M, Teh BT, Nordenskjold M, Richard S. Clinical and genetic studies of
Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome. J Med Genet. 2002 Dec;39(12):906-12. doi:
10.1136/jmg.39.12.906. Erratum In: J Med Genet. 2003 Feb;40(2):150. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Nickerson ML, Warren MB, Toro JR, Matrosova V, Glenn G, Turner ML, Duray P,
Merino M, Choyke P, Pavlovich CP, Sharma N, Walther M, Munroe D, Hill R, Maher E,
Greenberg C, Lerman MI, Linehan WM, Zbar B, Schmidt LS. Mutations in a novel gene
lead to kidney tumors, lung wall defects, and benign tumors of the hair follicle
in patients with the Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome. Cancer Cell. 2002 Aug;2(2):157-64.
doi: 10.1016/s1535-6108(02)00104-6. Citation on PubMed Pavlovich CP, Walther MM, Eyler RA, Hewitt SM, Zbar B, Linehan WM, Merino MJ.
Renal tumors in the Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome. Am J Surg Pathol. 2002
Dec;26(12):1542-52. doi: 10.1097/00000478-200212000-00002. Citation on PubMed Sattler EC, Steinlein OK. Birt-Hogg-Dube Syndrome. 2006 Feb 27 [updated 2024
Dec 5]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A,
editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of
Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1522/ Citation on PubMed Schmidt LS, Nickerson ML, Warren MB, Glenn GM, Toro JR, Merino MJ, Turner ML,
Choyke PL, Sharma N, Peterson J, Morrison P, Maher ER, Walther MM, Zbar B,
Linehan WM. Germline BHD-mutation spectrum and phenotype analysis of a large
cohort of families with Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome. Am J Hum Genet. 2005
Jun;76(6):1023-33. doi: 10.1086/430842. Epub 2005 Apr 25. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Schmidt LS, Warren MB, Nickerson ML, Weirich G, Matrosova V, Toro JR, Turner
ML, Duray P, Merino M, Hewitt S, Pavlovich CP, Glenn G, Greenberg CR, Linehan WM,
Zbar B. Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome, a genodermatosis associated with spontaneous
pneumothorax and kidney neoplasia, maps to chromosome 17p11.2. Am J Hum Genet.
2001 Oct;69(4):876-82. doi: 10.1086/323744. Epub 2001 Aug 30. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Warren MB, Torres-Cabala CA, Turner ML, Merino MJ, Matrosova VY, Nickerson ML,
Ma W, Linehan WM, Zbar B, Schmidt LS. Expression of Birt-Hogg-Dube gene mRNA in
normal and neoplastic human tissues. Mod Pathol. 2004 Aug;17(8):998-1011. doi:
10.1038/modpathol.3800152. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Kidney Cancer Lung Diseases Skin Conditions MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Collapsed lung (pneumothorax) Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated January 1, 2013