Beta-mannosidosis: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Beta-mannosidosis URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/beta-mannosidosis/ Beta-mannosidosis To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Beta-mannosidosis is a rare inherited disorder affecting the way certain sugar molecules are processed in the body. Signs and symptoms of beta-mannosidosis vary widely in severity, and the age of onset ranges from infancy to adulthood. Almost all individuals with beta-mannosidosis experience intellectual disability, and some have delayed motor development and seizures. Affected individuals may be  prone to depression or have behavioral problems such as hyperactivity, impulsivity or aggression. People with beta-mannosidosis are often extremely introverted. People with beta-mannosidosis may experience an increased risk of respiratory and ear infections, hearing loss, speech impairment, swallowing difficulties, poor muscle tone (hypotonia), and reduced sensation or other nervous system abnormalities in the extremities (peripheral neuropathy). They may also exhibit distinctive facial features and clusters of enlarged blood vessels forming small, dark red spots on the skin (angiokeratomas). Frequency Beta-mannosidosis is believed to be a very rare disorder. It is difficult to determine the specific incidence of beta-mannosidosis, because people with mild or non-specific symptoms may never be diagnosed. Causes Variants (also known as mutations) in the MANBA gene cause beta-mannosidosis. The MANBA gene provides instructions for making the enzyme beta-mannosidase. This enzyme works in the lysosomes , which are compartments that digest and recycle materials in the cell. Within lysosomes, the enzyme helps break down complexes of sugar molecules (oligosaccharides) attached to proteins (glycoproteins). Beta-mannosidase is involved in the last step of this process, helping to break down complexes of two sugar molecules (disaccharides) containing a sugar molecule called mannose. Variants in the MANBA gene interfere with the ability of the beta-mannosidase enzyme to perform its role in breaking down mannose-containing disaccharides. These disaccharides gradually accumulate in the lysosomes and cause cells to malfunction, resulting in the signs and symptoms of beta-mannosidosis. Learn more about the gene associated with Beta-mannosidosis MANBA Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have variants. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Beta-D-mannosidosis Beta-mannosidase deficiency Lysosomal beta A mannosidosis Lysosomal beta-mannosidase deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Beta-D-mannosidosis Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Beta-mannosidosis Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MANNOSIDOSIS, BETA A, LYSOSOMAL; MANSB Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Alkhayat AH, Kraemer SA, Leipprandt JR, Macek M, Kleijer WJ, Friderici KH.
Human beta-mannosidase cDNA characterization and first identification of a
mutation associated with human beta-mannosidosis. Hum Mol Genet. 1998
Jan;7(1):75-83. doi: 10.1093/hmg/7.1.75. Citation on PubMed Bedilu R, Nummy KA, Cooper A, Wevers R, Smeitink J, Kleijer WJ, Friderici KH.
Variable clinical presentation of lysosomal beta-mannosidosis in patients with
null mutations. Mol Genet Metab. 2002 Dec;77(4):282-90. doi:
10.1016/s1096-7192(02)00172-5. Citation on PubMed Gort L, Duque J, Fabeiro JM, Zulaica A, Coll MJ, Chabas A. Molecular analysis
in two beta-mannosidosis patients: description of a new adult case. Mol Genet
Metab. 2006 Dec;89(4):398-400. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.07.001. Epub 2006 Aug
14. Citation on PubMed Molho-Pessach V, Bargal R, Abramowitz Y, Doviner V, Ingber A, Raas-Rothschild
A, Ne'eman Z, Zeigler M, Zlotogorski A. Angiokeratoma corporis diffusum in human
beta-mannosidosis: Report of a new case and a novel mutation. J Am Acad Dermatol.
2007 Sep;57(3):407-12. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2007.01.037. Epub 2007 Apr 8. Citation on PubMed Uchino Y, Fukushige T, Yotsumoto S, Hashiguchi T, Taguchi H, Suzuki N,
Konohana I, Kanzaki T. Morphological and biochemical studies of human
beta-mannosidosis: identification of a novel beta-mannosidase gene mutation. Br J
Dermatol. 2003 Jul;149(1):23-9. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2133.2003.05365.x. Citation on PubMed Zhu M, Lovell KL, Patterson JS, Saunders TL, Hughes ED, Friderici KH.
Beta-mannosidosis mice: a model for the human lysosomal storage disease. Hum Mol
Genet. 2006 Feb 1;15(3):493-500. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi465. Epub 2005 Dec 23. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Carbohydrate Metabolism Disorders Genetic Brain Disorders Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2023