Otopalatodigital syndrome type 2: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Otopalatodigital syndrome type 2 URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/otopalatodigital-syndrome-type-2/ Otopalatodigital syndrome type 2 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Otopalatodigital syndrome type 2 is a disorder primarily involving abnormalities in skeletal development. It is a member of a group of related conditions called otopalatodigital spectrum disorders, which also includes otopalatodigital syndrome type 1 , frontometaphyseal dysplasia , Melnick-Needles syndrome , and terminal osseous dysplasia . In general, these disorders involve hearing loss caused by malformations in the tiny bones in the ears ( ossicles ), problems in the development of the roof of the mouth (palate), and skeletal abnormalities involving the fingers or toes (digits). Otopalatodigital syndrome type 2 also tends to cause problems in other areas of the body, such as the brain and heart. People with otopalatodigital syndrome type 2 have characteristic facial features including wide-set and downward-slanting eyes; prominent brow ridges; a broad, flat nose; and a very small lower jaw and chin (micrognathia). Affected individuals often have abnormalities of the fingers and toes, such as unusual curvature of the fingers (camptodactyly) and shortened or absent thumbs and big toes. People with otopalatodigital syndrome type 2 usually have short stature, abnormally curved (bowed) bones in the arms and legs, and other abnormal or absent bones. Underdeveloped ribs can cause problems with breathing in affected individuals. Some people with this condition have an opening in the roof of the mouth (a cleft palate ) or hearing loss. In addition to skeletal abnormalities, individuals with otopalatodigital syndrome type 2 may have developmental delay, increased fluid in the center of the brain (hydrocephalus), protrusion of the abdominal organs through the navel ( omphalocele ), heart defects, chest abnormalities, obstruction of the ducts between the kidneys and bladder (ureters), and, in males, opening of the urethra on the underside of the penis (hypospadias). Males with otopalatodigital syndrome type 2 generally have much more severe signs and symptoms compared to affected females. Males with this condition typically do not survive past infancy because of respiratory failure due to an underdeveloped rib cage. Frequency Otopalatodigital syndrome type 2 is a rare disorder, affecting fewer than 1 in every 100,000 individuals. Its specific incidence is unknown. Causes Otopalatodigital syndrome type 2 is caused by mutations in the FLNA gene. The FLNA gene provides instructions for producing the protein filamin A, which helps build the network of protein filaments ( cytoskeleton ) that gives structure to cells and allows them to change shape and move. Filamin A binds to another protein called actin, and helps the actin to form the branching network of filaments that make up the cytoskeleton. Filamin A also links actin to many other proteins to perform various functions within the cell. The FLNA gene mutations that cause otopalatodigital syndrome type 2 all result in changes to the filamin A protein in the region that binds to actin. The mutations are described as "gain-of-function" because they appear to lead to a protein with an increased ability to bind to actin. Researchers believe that the mutations impair the stability of the cytoskeleton and disrupt cellular processes involved in skeletal development, but it is not known how changes in the protein relate to the specific signs and symptoms of otopalatodigital syndrome type 2. Learn more about the gene associated with Otopalatodigital syndrome type 2 FLNA Inheritance This condition is inherited in an X-linked pattern. A condition is considered X-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes in each cell. In males, who have only one X chromosome, a mutation in the only copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females, who have two copies of the X chromosome, one altered copy of the gene in each cell can lead to less severe features of the condition or may cause no signs or symptoms at all. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons. Other Names for This Condition Cranioorodigital syndrome Faciopalatoosseous syndrome FPO OPD syndrome, type 2 Oto-palato-digital syndrome, type II Taybi syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Oto-palato-digital syndrome, type II Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Otopalatodigital syndrome type 2 Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM OTOPALATODIGITAL SYNDROME, TYPE II; OPD2 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Batra P, Ryan FS, Witherow H, Calvert ML. Distraction in a case of
otopalatodigital syndrome type II. Int J Paediatr Dent. 2006 Jul;16(4):286-91.
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-263X.2006.00714.x. Citation on PubMed Marino-Enriquez A, Lapunzina P, Robertson SP, Rodriguez JI. Otopalatodigital
syndrome type 2 in two siblings with a novel filamin A 629G>T mutation:
clinical, pathological, and molecular findings. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 May
15;143A(10):1120-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31696. Citation on PubMed Moutton S, Fergelot P, Naudion S, Cordier MP, Sole G, Guerineau E, Hubert C,
Rooryck C, Vuillaume ML, Houcinat N, Deforges J, Bouron J, Deves S, Le Merrer M,
David A, Genevieve D, Giuliano F, Journel H, Megarbane A, Faivre L, Chassaing N,
Francannet C, Sarrazin E, Stattin EL, Vigneron J, Leclair D, Abadie C, Sarda P,
Baumann C, Delrue MA, Arveiler B, Lacombe D, Goizet C, Coupry I. Otopalatodigital
spectrum disorders: refinement of the phenotypic and mutational spectrum. J Hum
Genet. 2016 Aug;61(8):693-9. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2016.37. Epub 2016 May 19. Citation on PubMed Murphy-Ryan M, Babovic-Vuksanovic D, Lindor N. Bifid tongue, corneal clouding,
and Dandy-Walker malformation in a male infant with otopalatodigital syndrome
type 2. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Apr;155A(4):855-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33901. Epub
2011 Mar 15. Citation on PubMed Naudion S, Moutton S, Coupry I, Sole G, Deforges J, Guerineau E, Hubert C,
Deves S, Pilliod J, Rooryck C, Abel C, Le Breton F, Collardeau-Frachon S, Cordier
MP, Delezoide AL, Goldenberg A, Loget P, Melki J, Odent S, Patrier S, Verloes A,
Viot G, Blesson S, Bessieres B, Lacombe D, Arveiler B, Goizet C, Fergelot P.
Fetal phenotypes in otopalatodigital spectrum disorders. Clin Genet. 2016
Mar;89(3):371-7. doi: 10.1111/cge.12679. Epub 2015 Oct 29. Citation on PubMed Robertson S. X-Linked Otopalatodigital Spectrum Disorders. 2005 Nov 30
[updated 2019 Oct 3]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE,
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University
of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1393/ Citation on PubMed Robertson SP, Twigg SR, Sutherland-Smith AJ, Biancalana V, Gorlin RJ, Horn D,
Kenwrick SJ, Kim CA, Morava E, Newbury-Ecob R, Orstavik KH, Quarrell OW, Schwartz
CE, Shears DJ, Suri M, Kendrick-Jones J, Wilkie AO; OPD-spectrum Disorders
Clinical Collaborative Group. Localized mutations in the gene encoding the
cytoskeletal protein filamin A cause diverse malformations in humans. Nat Genet.
2003 Apr;33(4):487-91. doi: 10.1038/ng1119. Epub 2003 Mar 3. Citation on PubMed Robertson SP. Otopalatodigital syndrome spectrum disorders: otopalatodigital
syndrome types 1 and 2, frontometaphyseal dysplasia and Melnick-Needles syndrome.
Eur J Hum Genet. 2007 Jan;15(1):3-9. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201654. Epub 2006 Aug
23. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Bone Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated July 1, 2020