Combined malonic and methylmalonic aciduria: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Combined malonic and methylmalonic aciduria URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/combined-malonic-and-methylmalonic-aciduria/ Combined malonic and methylmalonic aciduria To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Combined malonic and methylmalonic aciduria (CMAMMA) is a condition characterized by high levels of certain chemicals, known as malonic acid and methylmalonic acid, in the body. A distinguishing feature of this condition is higher levels of methylmalonic acid than malonic acid in the urine, although both are elevated. The signs and symptoms of CMAMMA can begin in childhood. In some children, the buildup of acids causes the blood to become too acidic (ketoacidosis), which can damage the body's tissues and organs. Other signs and symptoms may include involuntary muscle tensing (dystonia), weak muscle tone (hypotonia), developmental delay, an inability to grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive), low blood glucose (hypoglycemia), and coma. Some affected children have an unusually small head size ( microcephaly ). Other people with CMAMMA do not develop signs and symptoms until adulthood. These individuals usually have neurological problems, such as seizures, loss of memory, a decline in thinking ability, or psychiatric diseases. Frequency CMAMMA appears to be a rare disease. Approximately a dozen cases have been reported in the scientific literature. Causes Mutations in the ACSF3 gene cause CMAMMA. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme that plays a role in the formation (synthesis) of fatty acids. Fatty acids are building blocks used to make fats (lipids). The ACSF3 enzyme performs a chemical reaction that converts malonic acid to malonyl-CoA, which is the first step of fatty acid synthesis in cellular structures called mitochondria . Based on this activity, the enzyme is classified as a malonyl-CoA synthetase. The ACSF3 enzyme also converts methylmalonic acid to methylmalonyl-CoA, making it a methylmalonyl-CoA synthetase as well. The effects of ACSF3 gene mutations are unknown. Researchers suspect that the mutations lead to altered enzymes that have little or no function. Because the enzyme cannot convert malonic and methylmalonic acids, they build up in the body. Damage to organs and tissues caused by accumulation of these acids may be responsible for the signs and symptoms of CMAMMA, although the mechanisms are unclear. Learn more about the gene associated with Combined malonic and methylmalonic aciduria ACSF3 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition CMAMMA Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Combined malonic and methylmalonic acidemia Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Combined malonic and methylmalonic acidemia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM COMBINED MALONIC AND METHYLMALONIC ACIDURIA; CMAMMA Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Alfares A, Nunez LD, Al-Thihli K, Mitchell J, Melancon S, Anastasio N, Ha KC,
Majewski J, Rosenblatt DS, Braverman N. Combined malonic and methylmalonic
aciduria: exome sequencing reveals mutations in the ACSF3 gene in patients with a
non-classic phenotype. J Med Genet. 2011 Sep;48(9):602-5. doi:
10.1136/jmedgenet-2011-100230. Epub 2011 Jul 23. Citation on PubMed Gregg AR, Warman AW, Thorburn DR, O'Brien WE. Combined malonic and
methylmalonic aciduria with normal malonyl-coenzyme A decarboxylase activity: a
case supporting multiple aetiologies. J Inherit Metab Dis. 1998 Jun;21(4):382-90.
doi: 10.1023/a:1005302607897. Citation on PubMed Kolker S, Schwab M, Horster F, Sauer S, Hinz A, Wolf NI, Mayatepek E, Hoffmann
GF, Smeitink JA, Okun JG. Methylmalonic acid, a biochemical hallmark of
methylmalonic acidurias but no inhibitor of mitochondrial respiratory chain. J
Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 28;278(48):47388-93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M308861200. Epub 2003
Sep 12. Citation on PubMed Melo DR, Kowaltowski AJ, Wajner M, Castilho RF. Mitochondrial energy
metabolism in neurodegeneration associated with methylmalonic acidemia. J
Bioenerg Biomembr. 2011 Feb;43(1):39-46. doi: 10.1007/s10863-011-9330-2. Citation on PubMed Sloan JL, Johnston JJ, Manoli I, Chandler RJ, Krause C, Carrillo-Carrasco N,
Chandrasekaran SD, Sysol JR, O'Brien K, Hauser NS, Sapp JC, Dorward HM, Huizing
M; NIH Intramural Sequencing Center Group; Barshop BA, Berry SA, James PM,
Champaigne NL, de Lonlay P, Valayannopoulos V, Geschwind MD, Gavrilov DK, Nyhan
WL, Biesecker LG, Venditti CP. Exome sequencing identifies ACSF3 as a cause of
combined malonic and methylmalonic aciduria. Nat Genet. 2011 Aug 14;43(9):883-6.
doi: 10.1038/ng.908. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Genetic Brain Disorders Genetic Disorders Lipid Metabolism Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Related Medical Tests Methylmalonic Acid (MMA) Test Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated January 1, 2013