Kuskokwim syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Kuskokwim syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/kuskokwim-syndrome/ Kuskokwim syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Kuskokwim syndrome is characterized by joint deformities called contractures that restrict the movement of affected joints. This condition has been found only in a population of Alaska Natives known as Yup'ik Eskimos, who live in and around a region of southwest Alaska known as the Kuskokwim River Delta. In Kuskokwim syndrome, contractures most commonly affect the knees, ankles, and elbows, although other joints, particularly of the lower body, can be affected. The contractures are usually present at birth and worsen during childhood. They tend to stabilize after childhood, and they remain throughout life. Some individuals with this condition have other bone abnormalities, most commonly affecting the spine, pelvis, and feet. Affected individuals can develop an inward curve of the lower back ( lordosis ), a spine that curves to the side ( scoliosis ), wedge-shaped spinal bones, or an abnormality of the collarbones (clavicles) described as clubbing. Affected individuals are typically shorter than their peers and they may have an abnormally large head ( macrocephaly ). Frequency Kuskokwim syndrome is extremely rare. It affects a small number of people from the Yup'ik Eskimo population in southwest Alaska. Causes Kuskokwim syndrome is caused by mutations in the FKBP10 gene, which provides instructions for making the FKBP10 protein (formerly known as FKBP65). This protein is important for the correct processing of complex molecules called collagens, which provide structure and strength to connective tissues that support the body's bones, joints, and organs. Collagen molecules are cross-linked to one another to form long, thin fibrils, which are found in the spaces around cells (the extracellular matrix). The formation of cross-links results in very strong collagen fibrils. The FKBP10 protein attaches to collagens and plays a role in their cross-linking. A mutation in the FKBP10 gene alters the FKBP10 protein, making it unstable and easily broken down. As a result, people with Kuskokwim syndrome have only about 5 percent of the normal amount of FKBP10 protein. This reduction in protein levels impairs collagen cross-linking and leads to a disorganized network of collagen molecules. It is unclear how these changes in the collagen matrix are involved in the development of joint contractures and other abnormalities in people with Kuskokwim syndrome. Learn more about the gene associated with Kuskokwim syndrome FKBP10 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Arthrogryposis-like syndrome Bruck syndrome 1 Kuskokwim disease Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Bruck syndrome 1 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Kuskokwim syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM BRUCK SYNDROME 1; BRKS1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Barnes AM, Duncan G, Weis M, Paton W, Cabral WA, Mertz EL, Makareeva E,
Gambello MJ, Lacbawan FL, Leikin S, Fertala A, Eyre DR, Bale SJ, Marini JC.
Kuskokwim syndrome, a recessive congenital contracture disorder, extends the
phenotype of FKBP10 mutations. Hum Mutat. 2013 Sep;34(9):1279-88. doi:
10.1002/humu.22362. Epub 2013 Jul 8. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Petajan JH, Momberger GL, Aase J, Wright DG. Arthrogryposis syndrome
(Kuskokwim disease) in the Eskimo. JAMA. 1969 Sep 8;209(10):1481-6. No abstract
available. Citation on PubMed Schwarze U, Cundy T, Pyott SM, Christiansen HE, Hegde MR, Bank RA, Pals G,
Ankala A, Conneely K, Seaver L, Yandow SM, Raney E, Babovic-Vuksanovic D, Stoler
J, Ben-Neriah Z, Segel R, Lieberman S, Siderius L, Al-Aqeel A, Hannibal M,
Hudgins L, McPherson E, Clemens M, Sussman MD, Steiner RD, Mahan J, Smith R,
Anyane-Yeboa K, Wynn J, Chong K, Uster T, Aftimos S, Sutton VR, Davis EC, Kim LS,
Weis MA, Eyre D, Byers PH. Mutations in FKBP10, which result in Bruck syndrome
and recessive forms of osteogenesis imperfecta, inhibit the hydroxylation of
telopeptide lysines in bone collagen. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Jan 1;22(1):1-17. doi:
10.1093/hmg/dds371. Epub 2012 Sep 4. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Joint Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Contracture deformity Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated November 1, 2013