Milroy disease: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Milroy disease URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/milroy-disease/ Milroy disease To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Milroy disease is a condition that affects the normal function of the lymphatic system. The lymphatic system produces and transports fluids and immune cells throughout the body. Impaired transport with accumulation of lymph fluid can cause swelling ( lymphedema ). Individuals with Milroy disease typically have lymphedema in their lower legs and feet at birth or develop it in infancy. The lymphedema typically occurs on both sides of the body and may worsen over time. Milroy disease is associated with other features in addition to lymphedema. Males with Milroy disease are sometimes born with an accumulation of fluid in the scrotum (hydrocele). Males and females may have upslanting toenails, deep creases in the toes, wart-like growths (papillomas), and prominent leg veins. Some individuals develop non-contagious skin infections called cellulitis that can damage the thin tubes that carry lymph fluid (lymphatic vessels). Episodes of cellulitis can cause further swelling in the lower limbs. Frequency Milroy disease is a rare disorder; its incidence is unknown. Causes Mutations in the FLT4 gene cause some cases of Milroy disease. The FLT4 gene provides instructions for producing a protein called vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 3 (VEGFR-3), which regulates the development and maintenance of the lymphatic system . Mutations in the FLT4 gene interfere with the growth, movement, and survival of cells that line the lymphatic vessels (lymphatic endothelial cells). These mutations lead to the development of small or absent lymphatic vessels. If lymph fluid is not properly transported, it builds up in the body's tissues and causes lymphedema . It is not known how mutations in the FLT4 gene lead to the other features of this disorder. Many individuals with Milroy disease do not have a mutation in the FLT4 gene. In these individuals, the cause of the disorder is unknown. Learn more about the gene associated with Milroy disease FLT4 Inheritance Milroy disease is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In many cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent . Other cases may result from new mutations in the FLT4 gene.  These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. About 10 percent to 15 percent of people with a mutation in the FLT4 gene do not develop the features of Milroy disease. Other Names for This Condition Congenital familial lymphedema Hereditary lymphedema type I Milroy's disease Nonne-Milroy lymphedema Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary lymphedema type I Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM LYMPHATIC MALFORMATION 1; LMPHM1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Brice G, Child AH, Evans A, Bell R, Mansour S, Burnand K, Sarfarazi M, Jeffery
S, Mortimer P. Milroy disease and the VEGFR-3 mutation phenotype. J Med Genet.
2005 Feb;42(2):98-102. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2004.024802. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Butler MG, Dagenais SL, Rockson SG, Glover TW. A novel VEGFR3 mutation causes
Milroy disease. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Jun 1;143A(11):1212-7. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.31703. Citation on PubMed Evans AL, Bell R, Brice G, Comeglio P, Lipede C, Jeffery S, Mortimer P,
Sarfarazi M, Child AH. Identification of eight novel VEGFR-3 mutations in
families with primary congenital lymphoedema. J Med Genet. 2003
Sep;40(9):697-703. doi: 10.1136/jmg.40.9.697. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Ghalamkarpour A, Morlot S, Raas-Rothschild A, Utkus A, Mulliken JB, Boon LM,
Vikkula M. Hereditary lymphedema type I associated with VEGFR3 mutation: the
first de novo case and atypical presentations. Clin Genet. 2006 Oct;70(4):330-5.
doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2006.00687.x. Citation on PubMed Irrthum A, Karkkainen MJ, Devriendt K, Alitalo K, Vikkula M. Congenital
hereditary lymphedema caused by a mutation that inactivates VEGFR3 tyrosine
kinase. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Aug;67(2):295-301. doi: 10.1086/303019. Epub 2000
Jun 9. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Karkkainen MJ, Ferrell RE, Lawrence EC, Kimak MA, Levinson KL, McTigue MA,
Alitalo K, Finegold DN. Missense mutations interfere with VEGFR-3 signalling in
primary lymphoedema. Nat Genet. 2000 Jun;25(2):153-9. doi: 10.1038/75997. Citation on PubMed Levinson KL, Feingold E, Ferrell RE, Glover TW, Traboulsi EI, Finegold DN. Age
of onset in hereditary lymphedema. J Pediatr. 2003 Jun;142(6):704-8. doi:
10.1067/mpd.2003.235. Citation on PubMed Van Zanten M, Mansour S, Ostergaard P, Mortimer P, Gordon K. Milroy Disease.
2006 Apr 27 [updated 2021 Feb 18]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA,
Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA):
University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1239/ Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Lymphatic Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Lymphatic obstruction Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated April 1, 2013