Ataxia neuropathy spectrum: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Ataxia neuropathy spectrum URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/ataxia-neuropathy-spectrum/ Ataxia neuropathy spectrum To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Ataxia neuropathy spectrum is part of a group of conditions called the POLG -related disorders. The conditions in this group feature a range of similar signs and symptoms involving muscle-, nerve-, and brain-related functions. Ataxia neuropathy spectrum now includes the conditions previously called mitochondrial recessive ataxia syndrome (MIRAS) and sensory ataxia neuropathy dysarthria and ophthalmoplegia (SANDO). As the name implies, people with ataxia neuropathy spectrum typically have problems with coordination and balance (ataxia) and disturbances in nerve function (neuropathy). The neuropathy can be classified as sensory, motor, or a combination of the two (mixed). Sensory neuropathy causes numbness, tingling, or pain in the arms and legs, and motor neuropathy refers to disturbance in the nerves used for muscle movement. Most people with ataxia neuropathy spectrum also have severe brain dysfunction (encephalopathy) and seizures. Some affected individuals have weakness of the external muscles of the eye (ophthalmoplegia), which leads to drooping eyelids ( ptosis ). Other signs and symptoms can include involuntary muscle twitches (myoclonus), liver disease, depression , migraine headaches, or blindness. Frequency The prevalence of ataxia neuropathy spectrum is unknown. Causes Ataxia neuropathy spectrum is caused by mutations in the POLG gene or, rarely, the TWNK gene. The POLG gene provides instructions for making one part, the alpha subunit, of a protein called polymerase gamma (pol γ).  The TWNK gene provides instructions for making a protein called Twinkle. Pol γ and Twinkle function in mitochondria , which are structures within cells that use oxygen to convert the energy from food into a form cells can use. Mitochondria each contain a small amount of DNA, known as mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), which is essential for the normal function of these structures. Pol γ and Twinkle are both integral to the process of DNA replication by which new copies of mtDNA are produced. Mutated pol γ or mutated Twinkle reduce mtDNA replication. Although the mechanisms are unknown, mutations in the POLG gene often result in fewer copies of mtDNA (mtDNA depletion), and mutations in the TWNK gene often result in deletions of large regions of mtDNA (mtDNA deletion). MtDNA depletion or deletion occurs most commonly in muscle, brain, or liver cells. MtDNA depletion causes a decrease in cellular energy, which could account for the signs and symptoms of ataxia neuropathy spectrum. It is unclear what role mtDNA deletions play in the signs and symptoms of the condition. Learn more about the genes associated with Ataxia neuropathy spectrum POLG TWNK Inheritance Ataxia neuropathy spectrum can have different inheritance patterns depending on the associated gene. Mutations in the POLG gene cause a form of the condition that is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Mutations in the TWNK gene cause a form of the condition that is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition ANS MIRAS Mitochondrial recessive ataxia syndrome SANDO Sensory ataxia neuropathy dysarthria and ophthalmoplegia Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Sensory ataxic neuropathy, dysarthria, and ophthalmoparesis Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Sensory ataxic neuropathy-dysarthria-ophthalmoparesis syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM SENSORY ATAXIC NEUROPATHY, DYSARTHRIA, AND OPHTHALMOPARESIS; SANDO Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Chan SS, Longley MJ, Copeland WC. The common A467T mutation in the human
mitochondrial DNA polymerase (POLG) compromises catalytic efficiency and
interaction with the accessory subunit. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 9;280(36):31341-6.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M506762200. Epub 2005 Jul 16. Citation on PubMed Cohen BH, Chinnery PF, Copeland WC. POLG-Related Disorders. 2010 Mar
16 [updated 2024 Feb 29]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace
SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA):
University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK26471/ Citation on PubMed Hudson G, Deschauer M, Busse K, Zierz S, Chinnery PF. Sensory ataxic
neuropathy due to a novel C10Orf2 mutation with probable germline mosaicism.
Neurology. 2005 Jan 25;64(2):371-3. doi: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000149767.51152.83. Citation on PubMed Milone M, Massie R. Polymerase gamma 1 mutations: clinical correlations.
Neurologist. 2010 Mar;16(2):84-91. doi: 10.1097/NRL.0b013e3181c78a89. Citation on PubMed Moraes CT, Shanske S, Tritschler HJ, Aprille JR, Andreetta F, Bonilla E, Schon
EA, DiMauro S. mtDNA depletion with variable tissue expression: a novel genetic
abnormality in mitochondrial diseases. Am J Hum Genet. 1991 Mar;48(3):492-501. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Rocher C, Taanman JW, Pierron D, Faustin B, Benard G, Rossignol R, Malgat M,
Pedespan L, Letellier T. Influence of mitochondrial DNA level on cellular energy
metabolism: implications for mitochondrial diseases. J Bioenerg Biomembr. 2008
Apr;40(2):59-67. doi: 10.1007/s10863-008-9130-5. Epub 2008 Apr 16. Citation on PubMed Stumpf JD, Copeland WC. Mitochondrial DNA replication and disease: insights
from DNA polymerase gamma mutations. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2011 Jan;68(2):219-33. doi:
10.1007/s00018-010-0530-4. Epub 2010 Oct 8. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Van Goethem G, Martin JJ, Dermaut B, Lofgren A, Wibail A, Ververken D, Tack P,
Dehaene I, Van Zandijcke M, Moonen M, Ceuterick C, De Jonghe P, Van Broeckhoven
C. Recessive POLG mutations presenting with sensory and ataxic neuropathy in
compound heterozygote patients with progressive external ophthalmoplegia.
Neuromuscul Disord. 2003 Feb;13(2):133-42. doi: 10.1016/s0960-8966(02)00216-x. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Balance Problems Degenerative Nerve Diseases Genetic Brain Disorders Genetic Disorders Movement Disorders Seizures MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 1, 2011