MEGDEL syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → MEGDEL syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/megdel-syndrome/ MEGDEL syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description MEGDEL syndrome is an inherited disorder that affects multiple body systems. It is named for several of its features: 3-methylglutaconic aciduria (MEG), deafness (D), encephalopathy (E), and Leigh-like disease (L). MEGDEL syndrome is characterized by abnormally high levels of an acid, called 3-methylglutaconic acid, in the urine (3-methylglutaconic aciduria). MEGDEL syndrome is one of a group of metabolic disorders that can be diagnosed by presence of this feature. People with MEGDEL syndrome also have high urine levels of another acid called 3-methylglutaric acid. In infancy, individuals with MEGDEL syndrome develop hearing loss caused by changes in the inner ear (sensorineural deafness); the hearing problems gradually worsen over time. Another feature of MEGDEL syndrome is brain dysfunction (encephalopathy). In infancy, encephalopathy leads to difficulty feeding, an inability to grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive), and weak muscle tone (hypotonia). Infants with MEGDEL syndrome later develop involuntary muscle tensing (dystonia) and muscle stiffness (spasticity), which worsen over time. Because of these brain and muscle problems, affected babies have delayed development of mental and movement abilities (psychomotor delay), or they may lose skills they already developed. Individuals with MEGDEL syndrome have intellectual disability and never learn to speak. People with MEGDEL syndrome have changes in the brain that resemble those in another condition called Leigh syndrome . These changes, which can be seen with medical imaging, are referred to as Leigh-like disease. Other features that occur commonly in MEGDEL syndrome include low blood glucose (hypoglycemia) in affected newborns; liver problems (hepatopathy) in infancy, which can be serious but improve by early childhood; and episodes of abnormally high amounts of lactic acid in the blood (lactic acidosis). The life expectancy of individuals with MEGDEL syndrome is unknown. Because of the severe health problems caused by the disorder, some affected individuals do not survive past infancy. Frequency MEGDEL syndrome is a rare disorder; its prevalence is unknown. At least 40 affected individuals have been mentioned in the medical literature. Causes MEGDEL syndrome is caused by mutations in the SERAC1 gene. The function of the protein produced from this gene is not completely understood, although research suggests that it is involved in altering (remodeling) certain fats called phospholipids, particularly a phospholipid known as phosphatidylglycerol. Another phospholipid called cardiolipin is made from phosphatidylglycerol. Cardiolipin is a component of the membrane that surrounds cellular structures called mitochondria , which convert the energy from food into a form that cells can use, and is important for the proper functioning of these structures. SERAC1 gene mutations involved in MEGDEL syndrome lead to little or no SERAC1 protein function. As a result, phosphatidylglycerol remodeling is impaired, which likely alters the composition of cardiolipin. Researchers speculate that the abnormal cardiolipin affects mitochondrial function, reducing cellular energy production and leading to the neurological and hearing problems characteristic of MEGDEL syndrome. It is unclear how SERAC1 gene mutations lead to abnormal release of 3-methylglutaconic acid in the urine, although it is thought to be related to mitochondrial dysfunction. Learn more about the gene associated with MEGDEL syndrome SERAC1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition 3-methylglutaconic aciduria type IV with sensorineural deafness, encephalopathy, and Leigh-like syndrome 3-methylglutaconic aciduria with deafness, encephalopathy, and Leigh-like syndrome MEGDHEL syndrome SERAC1 defect Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: 3-methylglutaconic aciduria with deafness, encephalopathy, and Leigh-like syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center MEGDEL syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM 3-METHYLGLUTACONIC ACIDURIA WITH DEAFNESS, ENCEPHALOPATHY, AND LEIGH-LIKE SYNDROME; MEGDEL Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Sarig O, Goldsher D, Nousbeck J, Fuchs-Telem D, Cohen-Katsenelson K, Iancu TC,
Manov I, Saada A, Sprecher E, Mandel H. Infantile mitochondrial hepatopathy is a
cardinal feature of MEGDEL syndrome (3-methylglutaconic aciduria type IV with
sensorineural deafness, encephalopathy and Leigh-like syndrome) caused by novel
mutations in SERAC1. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Sep;161A(9):2204-15. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.36059. Epub 2013 Aug 5. Citation on PubMed Tort F, Garcia-Silva MT, Ferrer-Cortes X, Navarro-Sastre A, Garcia-Villoria J,
Coll MJ, Vidal E, Jimenez-Almazan J, Dopazo J, Briones P, Elpeleg O, Ribes A.
Exome sequencing identifies a new mutation in SERAC1 in a patient with
3-methylglutaconic aciduria. Mol Genet Metab. 2013 Sep-Oct;110(1-2):73-7. doi:
10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.04.021. Epub 2013 May 3. Citation on PubMed Wortmann S, Rodenburg RJ, Huizing M, Loupatty FJ, de Koning T, Kluijtmans LA,
Engelke U, Wevers R, Smeitink JA, Morava E. Association of 3-methylglutaconic
aciduria with sensori-neural deafness, encephalopathy, and Leigh-like syndrome
(MEGDEL association) in four patients with a disorder of the oxidative
phosphorylation. Mol Genet Metab. 2006 May;88(1):47-52. doi:
10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.01.013. Epub 2006 Mar 9. Citation on PubMed Wortmann SB, de Brouwer APM, Wevers RA, Morava E. SERAC1 Deficiency. 2014 Apr
17 [updated 2020 Jul 23]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace
SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA):
University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK195853/ Citation on PubMed Wortmann SB, Duran M, Anikster Y, Barth PG, Sperl W, Zschocke J, Morava E,
Wevers RA. Inborn errors of metabolism with 3-methylglutaconic aciduria as
discriminative feature: proper classification and nomenclature. J Inherit Metab
Dis. 2013 Nov;36(6):923-8. doi: 10.1007/s10545-012-9580-0. Epub 2013 Jan 8. Citation on PubMed Wortmann SB, Vaz FM, Gardeitchik T, Vissers LE, Renkema GH,
Schuurs-Hoeijmakers JH, Kulik W, Lammens M, Christin C, Kluijtmans LA, Rodenburg
RJ, Nijtmans LG, Grunewald A, Klein C, Gerhold JM, Kozicz T, van Hasselt PM,
Harakalova M, Kloosterman W, Baric I, Pronicka E, Ucar SK, Naess K, Singhal KK,
Krumina Z, Gilissen C, van Bokhoven H, Veltman JA, Smeitink JA, Lefeber DJ,
Spelbrink JN, Wevers RA, Morava E, de Brouwer AP. Mutations in the phospholipid
remodeling gene SERAC1 impair mitochondrial function and intracellular
cholesterol trafficking and cause dystonia and deafness. Nat Genet. 2012 Jun
10;44(7):797-802. doi: 10.1038/ng.2325. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Dystonia Genetic Brain Disorders Genetic Disorders Lipid Metabolism Disorders Newborn Screening MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Hypotonia Sensorineural deafness Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated July 1, 2014