Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/phosphoglycerate-dehydrogenase-deficiency/ Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase deficiency is a condition characterized by an unusually small head size (microcephaly); impaired development of physical reactions, movements, and speech (psychomotor retardation); and recurrent seizures (epilepsy). Different types of phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase deficiency have been described; they are distinguished by their severity and the age at which symptoms first begin. Most affected individuals have the infantile form, which is the most severe form, and are affected from infancy. Symptoms of the juvenile and adult types appear later in life; these types are very rare. In phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase deficiency there is a progressive loss of brain cells leading to a loss of brain tissue (brain atrophy), specifically affecting the fatty tissue known as myelin that surrounds nerve cells (hypomyelination). Frequently, the tissue that connects the two halves of the brain ( corpus callosum ) is small and thin, and the fluid-filled cavities (ventricles) near the center of the brain are enlarged. Because development of the brain is disrupted, the head does not grow at the same rate as the body, so it appears that the head is getting smaller as the body grows (progressive microcephaly ). Poor brain growth leads to an inability to achieve many developmental milestones such as sitting unsupported and speaking. Many affected infants also have difficulty feeding. The seizures in phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase deficiency can vary in type. Recurrent muscle contractions called infantile spasms are typical early in the disorder. Without early treatment, seizures may progress to tonic-clonic seizures, which involve a loss of consciousness, muscle rigidity, and convulsions; myoclonic seizures, which involve rapid, uncontrolled muscle jerks; or drop attacks, which are sudden episodes of weak muscle tone. Individuals with the infantile form of phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase deficiency develop many of the features described above. Individuals with the juvenile form typically have epilepsy as well as mild developmental delay and intellectual disability. Only one case of the adult form has been reported; signs and symptoms began in mid-adulthood and included mild intellectual disability; difficulty coordinating movements (ataxia); and numbness, tingling, and pain in the arms and legs (sensory neuropathy). Frequency This condition is likely a rare disorder, but its prevalence is unknown. At least 15 cases have been described in the scientific literature. Causes Mutations in the PHGDH gene cause phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase deficiency. The PHGDH gene provides instructions for making the parts (subunits) that make up the phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase enzyme. Four PHGDH subunits combine to form the enzyme. This enzyme is involved in the production of the protein building block ( amino acid ) serine. Specifically, the enzyme converts a substance called 3-phosphoglycerate to 3-phosphohydroxypyruvate in the first step in serine production. Serine is necessary for the development and function of the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system). Serine is a part of chemical messengers called neurotransmitters that transmit signals in the nervous system . Proteins that form cell membranes and myelin also contain serine. Serine can be obtained from the diet, but brain cells must produce their own serine because dietary serine cannot cross the protective barrier that allows only certain substances to pass between blood vessels and the brain (the blood-brain barrier). PHGDH gene mutations result in the production of an enzyme with decreased function. As a result, less 3-phosphoglycerate is converted into 3-phosphohydroxypyruvate than normal and serine production is stalled at the first step. The lack of serine likely prevents the production of proteins and neurotransmitters in the brain and impairs the formation of normal cells and myelin. These disruptions in normal brain development lead to the signs and symptoms of phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase deficiency. Learn more about the gene associated with Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase deficiency PHGDH Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition 3-PGDH deficiency 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase deficiency PHGDH deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: PHGDH deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PHOSPHOGLYCERATE DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY; PHGDHD Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References de Koning TJ, Klomp LW, van Oppen AC, Beemer FA, Dorland L, van den Berg I,
Berger R. Prenatal and early postnatal treatment in
3-phosphoglycerate-dehydrogenase deficiency. Lancet. 2004 Dec
18-31;364(9452):2221-2. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(04)17596-X. Citation on PubMed de Koning TJ, Klomp LW. Serine-deficiency syndromes. Curr Opin Neurol. 2004
Apr;17(2):197-204. doi: 10.1097/00019052-200404000-00019. Citation on PubMed Kraoua I, Wiame E, Kraoua L, Nasrallah F, Benrhouma H, Rouissi A, Turki I,
Chaabouni H, Briand G, Kaabachi N, Van Schaftingen E, Gouider-Khouja N.
3-Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase deficiency: description of two new cases in
Tunisia and review of the literature. Neuropediatrics. 2013 Oct;44(5):281-5. doi:
10.1055/s-0033-1338133. Epub 2013 Apr 6. Citation on PubMed Tabatabaie L, de Koning TJ, Geboers AJ, van den Berg IE, Berger R, Klomp LW.
Novel mutations in 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH) are distributed
throughout the protein and result in altered enzyme kinetics. Hum Mutat. 2009
May;30(5):749-56. doi: 10.1002/humu.20934. Citation on PubMed Tabatabaie L, Klomp LW, Berger R, de Koning TJ. L-serine synthesis in the
central nervous system: a review on serine deficiency disorders. Mol Genet Metab.
2010 Mar;99(3):256-62. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2009.10.012. Epub 2009 Oct 25. Citation on PubMed Tabatabaie L, Klomp LW, Rubio-Gozalbo ME, Spaapen LJ, Haagen AA, Dorland L, de
Koning TJ. Expanding the clinical spectrum of 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase
deficiency. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2011 Feb;34(1):181-4. doi:
10.1007/s10545-010-9249-5. Epub 2010 Nov 27. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central van der Crabben SN, Verhoeven-Duif NM, Brilstra EH, Van Maldergem L, Coskun T,
Rubio-Gozalbo E, Berger R, de Koning TJ. An update on serine deficiency
disorders. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2013 Jul;36(4):613-9. doi:
10.1007/s10545-013-9592-4. Epub 2013 Mar 6. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Amino Acid Metabolism Disorders Developmental Disabilities Genetic Brain Disorders Genetic Disorders Seizures MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Microcephaly Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated May 1, 2014