Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/hereditary-diffuse-gastric-cancer/ Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) is an inherited disorder that greatly increases the chance of developing a form of stomach(gastric) cancer. In this form, known as diffuse gastric cancer, there is no solid tumor. Instead cancerous (malignant) cells multiply underneath the stomach lining , making the lining thick and rigid. The invasive nature of this type of cancer makes it highly likely that these cancer cells will spread ( metastasize ) to other tissues, such as the liver or nearby bones. Symptoms of diffuse gastric cancer occur late in the disease and can include stomach pain, nausea, vomiting, difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), decreased appetite, and weight loss. If the cancer metastasizes to other tissues, it may lead to an enlarged liver, yellowing of the eyes and skin (jaundice), an abnormal buildup of fluid in the abdominal cavity (ascites), firm lumps under the skin, or broken bones. In HDGC, gastric cancer usually occurs in a person's late thirties or early forties, although it can develop anytime during adulthood. If diffuse gastric cancer is detected early, the survival rate is high; however, because this type of cancer is hidden underneath the stomach lining, it is usually not diagnosed until the cancer has become widely invasive. At that stage of the disease, the survival rate is approximately 20 percent. Some people with HDGC have an increased risk of developing other types of cancer, such as a form of breast cancer in women that begins in the milk-producing glands (lobular breast cancer); prostate cancer ; and cancers of the colon (large intestine) and rectum, which are collectively referred to as colorectal cancer. Most people with HDGC have family members who have had one of the types of cancer associated with HDGC. In some families, all the affected members have diffuse gastric cancer. In other families, some affected members have diffuse gastric cancer and others have another associated form of cancer, such as lobular breast cancer. Frequently, HDGC-related cancers develop in individuals before the age of 50. Frequency Gastric cancer is the fourth most common form of cancer worldwide, affecting 900,000 people per year. HDGC probably accounts for less than 1 percent of these cases. Causes It is likely that 20 to 40 percent of individuals with HDGC have a mutation in the CDH1 gene. The CDH1 gene provides instructions for making a protein called epithelial cadherin or E-cadherin. This protein is found within the membrane that surrounds epithelial cells, which are the cells that line the surfaces and cavities of the body. E-cadherin helps neighboring cells stick to one another (cell adhesion) to form organized tissues. E-cadherin has many other functions including acting as a tumor suppressor protein, which means it prevents cells from growing and dividing too rapidly or in an uncontrolled way. People with HDGC caused by CDH1 gene mutations are born with one mutated copy of the gene in each cell. These mutations cause the production of an abnormally short, nonfunctional version of E-cadherin or alter the protein's structure. For diffuse gastric cancer to develop, a second mutation involving the other copy of the CDH1 gene must occur in the cells of the stomach lining during a person's lifetime. Women who are born with one mutated copy of the CDH1 gene have a 56 percent chance of acquiring a second mutation in the other copy of the gene and developing gastric cancer in their lifetimes; men have a 70 percent chance of acquiring a second mutation and developing gastric cancer. When both copies of the CDH1 gene are mutated in a particular cell, that cell cannot produce any functional E-cadherin. The loss of this protein prevents it from acting as a tumor suppressor, contributing to the uncontrollable growth and division of cells . A lack of E-cadherin also impairs cell adhesion, increasing the likelihood that cancer cells will not come together to form a tumor but will invade the stomach wall and metastasize as small clusters of cancer cells into nearby tissues. These CDH1 gene mutations also lead to a 40 to 50 percent chance of lobular breast cancer in women, a slightly increased risk of prostate cancer in men, and a slightly increased risk of colorectal cancer. It is unclear why CDH1 gene mutations primarily occur in the stomach lining and these other tissues. About 60 to 70 percent of individuals with HDGC do not have an identified mutation in the CDH1 gene. In some individuals, mutations in other cancer-inducing genes cause HDGC, but in some cases, the mechanism is unknown. Learn more about the gene associated with Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer CDH1 Additional Information from NCBI Gene: CTNNA1 Inheritance HDGC is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered CDH1 gene in each cell is sufficient to increase the risk of developing cancer. In most cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition. Other Names for This Condition E-cadherin-associated hereditary gastric cancer Familial diffuse gastric cancer FDGC HDGC Hereditary diffuse gastric adenocarcinoma Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary diffuse gastric adenocarcinoma Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM DIFFUSE GASTRIC AND LOBULAR BREAST CANCER SYNDROME; DGLBC Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Carneiro P, Fernandes MS, Figueiredo J, Caldeira J, Carvalho J, Pinheiro H,
Leite M, Melo S, Oliveira P, Simoes-Correia J, Oliveira MJ, Carneiro F,
Figueiredo C, Paredes J, Oliveira C, Seruca R. E-cadherin dysfunction in gastric
cancer--cellular consequences, clinical applications and open questions. FEBS
Lett. 2012 Aug 31;586(18):2981-9. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.07.045. Epub 2012
Jul 25. Citation on PubMed Figueiredo J, Soderberg O, Simoes-Correia J, Grannas K, Suriano G, Seruca R.
The importance of E-cadherin binding partners to evaluate the pathogenicity of
E-cadherin missense mutations associated to HDGC. Eur J Hum Genet. 2013
Mar;21(3):301-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.159. Epub 2012 Aug 1. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Fitzgerald RC, Hardwick R, Huntsman D, Carneiro F, Guilford P, Blair V, Chung
DC, Norton J, Ragunath K, Van Krieken JH, Dwerryhouse S, Caldas C; International
Gastric Cancer Linkage Consortium. Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer: updated
consensus guidelines for clinical management and directions for future research.
J Med Genet. 2010 Jul;47(7):436-44. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.074237. Erratum In: J
Med Genet. 2011 Mar;48(3):216. Van Krieken, Nicola [corrected to Van Grieken,
Nicola C]. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Hansford S, Kaurah P, Li-Chang H, Woo M, Senz J, Pinheiro H, Schrader KA,
Schaeffer DF, Shumansky K, Zogopoulos G, Santos TA, Claro I, Carvalho J, Nielsen
C, Padilla S, Lum A, Talhouk A, Baker-Lange K, Richardson S, Lewis I, Lindor NM,
Pennell E, MacMillan A, Fernandez B, Keller G, Lynch H, Shah SP, Guilford P,
Gallinger S, Corso G, Roviello F, Caldas C, Oliveira C, Pharoah PD, Huntsman DG.
Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer Syndrome: CDH1 Mutations and Beyond. JAMA
Oncol. 2015 Apr;1(1):23-32. doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2014.168. Erratum In: JAMA
Oncol. 2015 Apr;1(1):110. doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2015.0410. Citation on PubMed Kluijt I, Siemerink EJ, Ausems MG, van Os TA, de Jong D, Simoes-Correia J, van
Krieken JH, Ligtenberg MJ, Figueiredo J, van Riel E, Sijmons RH, Plukker JT, van
Hillegersberg R, Dekker E, Oliveira C, Cats A, Hoogerbrugge N; Dutch Working
Group on Hereditary Gastric Cancer. CDH1-related hereditary diffuse gastric
cancer syndrome: clinical variations and implications for counseling. Int J
Cancer. 2012 Jul 15;131(2):367-76. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26398. Epub 2011 Oct 23. Citation on PubMed Kluijt I, Sijmons RH, Hoogerbrugge N, Plukker JT, de Jong D, van Krieken JH,
van Hillegersberg R, Ligtenberg M, Bleiker E, Cats A; Dutch Working Group on
Hereditary Gastric Cancer. Familial gastric cancer: guidelines for diagnosis,
treatment and periodic surveillance. Fam Cancer. 2012 Sep;11(3):363-9. doi:
10.1007/s10689-012-9521-y. Citation on PubMed Majewski IJ, Kluijt I, Cats A, Scerri TS, de Jong D, Kluin RJ, Hansford S,
Hogervorst FB, Bosma AJ, Hofland I, Winter M, Huntsman D, Jonkers J, Bahlo M,
Bernards R. An alpha-E-catenin (CTNNA1) mutation in hereditary diffuse gastric
cancer. J Pathol. 2013 Mar;229(4):621-9. doi: 10.1002/path.4152. Citation on PubMed Oliveira C, Seruca R, Hoogerbrugge N, Ligtenberg M, Carneiro F. Clinical
utility gene card for: Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC). Eur J Hum Genet.
2013 Aug;21(8). doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.247. Epub 2013 Feb 27. No abstract
available. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Simoes-Correia J, Figueiredo J, Lopes R, Stricher F, Oliveira C, Serrano L,
Seruca R. E-cadherin destabilization accounts for the pathogenicity of missense
mutations in hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33783. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0033783. Epub 2012 Mar 21. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central van der Post RS, Vogelaar IP, Carneiro F, Guilford P, Huntsman D, Hoogerbrugge
N, Caldas C, Schreiber KE, Hardwick RH, Ausems MG, Bardram L, Benusiglio PR,
Bisseling TM, Blair V, Bleiker E, Boussioutas A, Cats A, Coit D, DeGregorio L,
Figueiredo J, Ford JM, Heijkoop E, Hermens R, Humar B, Kaurah P, Keller G, Lai J,
Ligtenberg MJ, O'Donovan M, Oliveira C, Pinheiro H, Ragunath K, Rasenberg E,
Richardson S, Roviello F, Schackert H, Seruca R, Taylor A, Ter Huurne A,
Tischkowitz M, Joe ST, van Dijck B, van Grieken NC, van Hillegersberg R, van
Sandick JW, Vehof R, van Krieken JH, Fitzgerald RC. Hereditary diffuse gastric
cancer: updated clinical guidelines with an emphasis on germline CDH1 mutation
carriers. J Med Genet. 2015 Jun;52(6):361-74. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103094.
Epub 2015 May 15. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Stomach Cancer MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Stomach cancer Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2016