Björnstad syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Björnstad syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/bjornstad-syndrome/ Björnstad syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Björnstad syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by abnormal hair and hearing problems. Affected individuals have a condition known as pili torti, which means "twisted hair," so named because the strands appear twisted when viewed under a microscope. The hair is brittle and breaks easily, leading to short hair that grows slowly. In Björnstad  syndrome, pili torti usually affects only the hair on the head; eyebrows, eyelashes, and hair on other parts of the body are normal. The proportion of hairs affected and the severity of brittleness and breakage can vary. This hair abnormality commonly begins before the age of 2. It may become milder with age, particularly after puberty. People with Björnstad  syndrome also have hearing problems that become evident in early childhood. The hearing loss, which is caused by changes in the inner ear (sensorineural deafness), can range from mild to severe. Mildly affected individuals may be unable to hear sounds at certain frequencies, while severely affected individuals may not be able to hear at all. Frequency Björnstad syndrome is a rare condition, although its prevalence is unknown. It has been found in populations worldwide. Causes Björnstad syndrome is caused by mutations in the BCS1L gene. The protein produced from this gene is found in cell structures called mitochondria , which convert the energy from food into a form that cells can use. In mitochondria, the BCS1L protein plays a role in oxidative phosphorylation , which is a multistep process through which cells derive much of their energy. The BCS1L protein is critical for the formation of a group of proteins known as complex III, which is one of several protein complexes involved in this process. As a byproduct of its action in oxidative phosphorylation, complex III produces reactive oxygen species, which are harmful molecules that can damage DNA and tissues. BCS1L gene mutations involved in Björnstad syndrome alter the BCS1L protein and impair its ability to aid in complex III formation. The resulting decrease in complex III activity reduces oxidative phosphorylation. For unknown reasons, overall production of reactive oxygen species is increased, although production by complex III is reduced. Researchers believe that tissues in the inner ears and hair follicles are particularly sensitive to reactive oxygen species and are damaged by the abnormal amount of these molecules, leading to the characteristic features of Björnstad syndrome. Learn more about the gene associated with Björnstad syndrome BCS1L Inheritance Björnstad syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Bjornstad syndrome BJS Deafness and pili torti, Bjornstad type Pili torti and nerve deafness Pili torti-deafness syndrome Pili torti-sensorineural hearing loss PTD Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Pili torti-deafness syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Björnstad syndrome Pili torti Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM BJORNSTAD SYNDROME; BJS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Hinson JT, Fantin VR, Schonberger J, Breivik N, Siem G, McDonough B, Sharma P,
Keogh I, Godinho R, Santos F, Esparza A, Nicolau Y, Selvaag E, Cohen BH, Hoppel
CL, Tranebjaerg L, Eavey RD, Seidman JG, Seidman CE. Missense mutations in the
BCS1L gene as a cause of the Bjornstad syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2007 Feb
22;356(8):809-19. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa055262. Citation on PubMed Loche F, Bayle-Lebey P, Carriere JP, Bonafe JL, Bazex J, Schwarze HP. Pili
torti with congenital deafness (Bjornstad syndrome): a case report. Pediatr
Dermatol. 1999 May-Jun;16(3):220-1. doi: 10.1046/j.1525-1470.1999.00063.x. Citation on PubMed Richards KA, Mancini AJ. Three members of a family with pili torti and
sensorineural hearing loss: the Bjornstad syndrome. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2002
Feb;46(2):301-3. doi: 10.1067/mjd.2002.107969. Citation on PubMed Selvaag E. Pili torti and sensorineural hearing loss. A follow-up of
Bjornstad's original patients and a review of the literature. Eur J Dermatol.
2000 Mar;10(2):91-7. Citation on PubMed Siddiqi S, Siddiq S, Mansoor A, Oostrik J, Ahmad N, Kazmi SA, Kremer H, Qamar
R, Schraders M. Novel mutation in AAA domain of BCS1L causing Bjornstad syndrome.
J Hum Genet. 2013 Dec;58(12):819-21. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2013.101. Epub 2013 Oct 31. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Hearing Disorders and Deafness MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 1, 2014