Dandy-Walker malformation: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Dandy-Walker malformation URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/dandy-walker-malformation/ Dandy-Walker malformation To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Dandy-Walker malformation affects brain development, primarily development of the cerebellum, which is the part of the brain that coordinates movement. In individuals with this condition, various parts of the cerebellum develop abnormally, resulting in malformations that can be observed with medical imaging. The central part of the cerebellum (the vermis) is absent or very small and may be abnormally positioned. The right and left sides of the cerebellum may be small as well. In affected individuals, a fluid-filled cavity between the brainstem and the cerebellum (the fourth ventricle) and the part of the skull that contains the cerebellum and the brainstem (the posterior fossa) are abnormally large. These abnormalities often result in problems with movement, coordination, intellect, mood, and other neurological functions. In the majority of individuals with Dandy-Walker malformation, signs and symptoms caused by abnormal brain development are present at birth or develop within the first year of life. Some children have a buildup of fluid in the brain (hydrocephalus) that may cause increased head size ( macrocephaly ). Up to half of affected individuals have intellectual disability that ranges from mild to severe, and those with normal intelligence may have learning disabilities. Children with Dandy-Walker malformation often have delayed development, particularly a delay in motor skills such as crawling, walking, and coordinating movements. People with Dandy-Walker malformation may experience muscle stiffness and partial paralysis of the lower limbs (spastic paraplegia), and they may also have seizures. While rare, hearing and vision problems can be features of this condition. Less commonly, other brain abnormalities have been reported in people with Dandy-Walker malformation. These abnormalities include an underdeveloped or absent tissue connecting the left and right halves of the brain (agenesis of the corpus callosum), a sac-like protrusion of the brain through an opening at the back of the skull ( occipital encephalocele ), or a failure of some nerve cells ( neurons ) to migrate to their proper location in the brain during development. These additional brain malformations are associated with more severe signs and symptoms. Dandy-Walker malformation typically affects only the brain, but problems in other systems can include heart defects, malformations of the urogenital tract, extra fingers or toes ( polydactyly ) or fused fingers or toes ( syndactyly ), or abnormal facial features. In 10 to 20 percent of people with Dandy-Walker malformation, signs and symptoms of the condition do not appear until late childhood or into adulthood. These individuals typically have a different range of features than those affected in infancy, including headaches, an unsteady walking gait, paralysis of facial muscles (facial palsy), increased muscle tone, muscle spasms, and mental and behavioral changes. Rarely, people with Dandy-Walker malformation have no health problems related to the condition. Problems related to hydrocephalus or complications of its treatment are the most common cause of death in people with Dandy-Walker malformation. Frequency Dandy-Walker malformation is estimated to affect 1 in 10,000 to 30,000 newborns. Causes Researchers have found mutations in a few genes that are thought to cause Dandy-Walker malformation, but these mutations account for only a small number of cases. Dandy-Walker malformation has also been associated with many chromosomal abnormalities. This condition can be a feature of some conditions in which there is an extra copy of one chromosome in each cell (trisomy). Dandy-Walker malformation most often occurs in people with trisomy 18 (an extra copy of chromosome 18), but can also occur in people with trisomy 13 , trisomy 21 , or trisomy 9. This condition can also be associated with missing ( deletions ) or copied ( duplications ) pieces of certain chromosomes. Dandy-Walker malformation can also be a feature of genetic syndromes that are caused by mutations in specific genes. However, the brain malformations associated with Dandy-Walker malformation often occur as an isolated feature (not associated with other health problems), and in these cases the cause is frequently unknown. Research suggests that Dandy-Walker malformation could be caused by environmental factors that affect early development before birth. For example, exposure of the fetus to substances that cause birth defects (teratogens) may be involved in the development of this condition. In addition, a mother with diabetes is more likely than a healthy mother to have a child with Dandy-Walker malformation. Learn more about the gene associated with Dandy-Walker malformation FOXC1 Additional Information from NCBI Gene: ZIC1 ZIC4 Inheritance Most cases of Dandy-Walker malformation are sporadic, which means they occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. A small percentage of cases seem to run in families; however, Dandy-Walker malformation does not have a clear pattern of inheritance. Multiple genetic and environmental factors likely play a part in determining the risk of developing this disorder. First-degree relatives (such as siblings and children) of people with Dandy-Walker malformation have an increased risk of developing the condition compared with people in the general population. When Dandy-Walker malformation is a feature of a genetic condition, it is inherited in the pattern of that condition. Other Names for This Condition Dandy-Walker complex Dandy-Walker cyst Dandy-Walker deformity Dandy-Walker syndrome DWM DWS Hydrocephalus, internal, Dandy-Walker type Hydrocephalus, noncommunicating, Dandy-Walker type Luschka-Magendie foramina atresia Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Dandy-Walker syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Isolated Dandy-Walker malformation Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM DANDY-WALKER SYNDROME; DWS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Aldinger KA, Lehmann OJ, Hudgins L, Chizhikov VV, Bassuk AG, Ades LC, Krantz
ID, Dobyns WB, Millen KJ. FOXC1 is required for normal cerebellar development and
is a major contributor to chromosome 6p25.3 Dandy-Walker malformation. Nat Genet.
2009 Sep;41(9):1037-42. doi: 10.1038/ng.422. Epub 2009 Aug 9. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Bokhari I, Rehman L, Hassan S, Hashim MS. Dandy-Walker Malformation: A
Clinical and Surgical Outcome Analysis. J Coll Physicians Surg Pak. 2015
Jun;25(6):431-3. Citation on PubMed Grinberg I, Northrup H, Ardinger H, Prasad C, Dobyns WB, Millen KJ.
Heterozygous deletion of the linked genes ZIC1 and ZIC4 is involved in
Dandy-Walker malformation. Nat Genet. 2004 Oct;36(10):1053-5. doi:
10.1038/ng1420. Epub 2004 Aug 29. Citation on PubMed Has R, Ermis H, Yuksel A, Ibrahimoglu L, Yildirim A, Sezer HD, Basaran S.
Dandy-Walker malformation: a review of 78 cases diagnosed by prenatal sonography.
Fetal Diagn Ther. 2004 Jul-Aug;19(4):342-7. doi: 10.1159/000077963. Citation on PubMed Imataka G, Yamanouchi H, Arisaka O. Dandy-Walker syndrome and chromosomal
abnormalities. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2007 Dec;47(4):113-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1741-4520.2007.00158.x. Citation on PubMed Reeder MR, Botto LD, Keppler-Noreuil KM, Carey JC, Byrne JL, Feldkamp ML;
National Birth Defects Prevention Study. Risk factors for Dandy-Walker
malformation: a population-based assessment. Am J Med Genet A. 2015
Sep;167A(9):2009-16. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37124. Epub 2015 May 1. Citation on PubMed Sasaki-Adams D, Elbabaa SK, Jewells V, Carter L, Campbell JW, Ritter AM. The
Dandy-Walker variant: a case series of 24 pediatric patients and evaluation of
associated anomalies, incidence of hydrocephalus, and developmental outcomes. J
Neurosurg Pediatr. 2008 Sep;2(3):194-9. doi: 10.3171/PED/2008/2/9/194. Citation on PubMed Spennato P, Mirone G, Nastro A, Buonocore MC, Ruggiero C, Trischitta V,
Aliberti F, Cinalli G. Hydrocephalus in Dandy-Walker malformation. Childs Nerv
Syst. 2011 Oct;27(10):1665-81. doi: 10.1007/s00381-011-1544-4. Epub 2011 Sep 17. Citation on PubMed Tohyama J, Kato M, Kawasaki S, Harada N, Kawara H, Matsui T, Akasaka N, Ohashi
T, Kobayashi Y, Matsumoto N. Dandy-Walker malformation associated with
heterozygous ZIC1 and ZIC4 deletion: Report of a new patient. Am J Med Genet A.
2011 Jan;155A(1):130-3. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33652. Epub 2010 Dec 10. Citation on PubMed Zaki MS, Masri A, Gregor A, Gleeson JG, Rosti RO. Dandy-Walker malformation,
genitourinary abnormalities, and intellectual disability in two families. Am J
Med Genet A. 2015 Nov;167A(11):2503-2507. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37225. Epub 2015
Jun 24. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Brain Malformations Cerebellar Disorders Genetic Disorders Hydrocephalus MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated October 1, 2015