Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/multiple-epiphyseal-dysplasia/ Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia is a disorder of cartilage and bone development primarily affecting the ends of the long bones in the arms and legs (epiphyses). There are two types of multiple epiphyseal dysplasia, which can be distinguished by their pattern of inheritance. Both the dominant and recessive types have relatively mild signs and symptoms, including joint pain that most commonly affects the hips and knees, early-onset arthritis, and a waddling walk. Although some people with multiple epiphyseal dysplasia have mild short stature as adults, most are of normal height. The majority of individuals are diagnosed during childhood; however, some mild cases may not be diagnosed until adulthood. Recessive multiple epiphyseal dysplasia is distinguished from the dominant type by malformations of the hands, feet, and knees and abnormal curvature of the spine ( scoliosis ). About 50 percent of individuals with recessive multiple epiphyseal dysplasia are born with at least one abnormal feature, including an inward- and upward-turning foot ( clubfoot ), an opening in the roof of the mouth ( cleft palate ), an unusual curving of the fingers or toes ( clinodactyly ), or ear swelling. An abnormality of the kneecap called a double-layered patella is also relatively common. Frequency The incidence of dominant multiple epiphyseal dysplasia is estimated to be at least 1 in 10,000 newborns. The incidence of recessive multiple epiphyseal dysplasia is unknown. Both forms of this disorder may actually be more common because some people with mild symptoms are never diagnosed. Causes Mutations in the COMP , COL9A1 , COL9A2 , COL9A3 , or MATN3 gene can cause dominant multiple epiphyseal dysplasia. These genes provide instructions for making proteins that are found in the spaces between cartilage-forming cells (chondrocytes). These proteins interact with each other and play an important role in cartilage and bone formation. Cartilage is a tough, flexible tissue that makes up much of the skeleton during early development. Most cartilage is later converted to bone, except for the cartilage that continues to cover and protect the ends of bones and is present in the nose and external ears. The majority of individuals with dominant multiple epiphyseal dysplasia have mutations in the COMP gene. About 10 percent of affected individuals have mutations in the MATN3 gene. Mutations in the COMP or MATN3 gene prevent the release of the proteins produced from these genes into the spaces between the chondrocytes. The absence of these proteins leads to the formation of abnormal cartilage, which can cause the skeletal problems characteristic of dominant multiple epiphyseal dysplasia. The COL9A1 , COL9A2 , and COL9A3 genes provide instructions for making a protein called type IX collagen. Collagens are a family of proteins that strengthen and support connective tissues , such as skin, bone, cartilage, tendons, and ligaments. Mutations in the COL9A1 , COL9A2 , or COL9A3 gene are found in less than five percent of individuals with dominant multiple epiphyseal dysplasia. It is not known how mutations in these genes cause the signs and symptoms of this disorder. Research suggests that mutations in these genes may cause type IX collagen to accumulate inside the cell or interact abnormally with other cartilage components. Some people with dominant multiple epiphyseal dysplasia do not have a mutation in the COMP , COL9A1 , COL9A2 , COL9A3 , or MATN3 gene. In these cases, the cause of the condition is unknown. Mutations in the SLC26A2 gene cause recessive multiple epiphyseal dysplasia. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is essential for the normal development of cartilage and for its conversion to bone. Mutations in the SLC26A2 gene alter the structure of developing cartilage, preventing bones from forming properly and resulting in the skeletal problems characteristic of recessive multiple epiphyseal dysplasia. Learn more about the genes associated with Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia COL9A1 COL9A2 COL9A3 COMP MATN3 SLC26A2 Inheritance Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia can have different inheritance patterns. This condition can be inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent.  Other cases may result from new mutations in the gene.  These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia can also be inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. Most often, the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition EDM1 EDM2 EDM3 EDM4 EDM5 Epiphyseal dysplasia, Fairbank type Epiphyseal dysplasia, multiple, 1 Epiphyseal dysplasia, multiple, 2 Epiphyseal dysplasia, multiple, 3 Epiphyseal dysplasia, multiple, 4 Epiphyseal dysplasia, multiple, 5 Epiphyseal dysplasia, Ribbing type MED Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia, autosomal dominant Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia, autosomal recessive RMED Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Epiphyseal dysplasia, multiple, 2 Genetic Testing Registry: Epiphyseal dysplasia, multiple, 3 Genetic Testing Registry: Epiphyseal dysplasia, multiple, 6 Genetic Testing Registry: Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia type 1 Genetic Testing Registry: Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia type 4 Genetic Testing Registry: Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia type 5 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM COLLAGEN, TYPE IX, ALPHA-1; COL9A1 EPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, MULTIPLE, 1; EDM1 EPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, MULTIPLE, 4; EDM4 EPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, MULTIPLE, 3; EDM3 EPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, MULTIPLE, 2; EDM2 EPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, MULTIPLE, 5; EDM5 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Ballhausen D, Bonafe L, Terhal P, Unger SL, Bellus G, Classen M, Hamel BC,
Spranger J, Zabel B, Cohn DH, Cole WG, Hecht JT, Superti-Furga A. Recessive
multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (rMED): phenotype delineation in eighteen
homozygotes for DTDST mutation R279W. J Med Genet. 2003 Jan;40(1):65-71. doi:
10.1136/jmg.40.1.65. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Briggs MD, Chapman KL. Pseudoachondroplasia and multiple epiphyseal dysplasia:
mutation review, molecular interactions, and genotype to phenotype correlations.
Hum Mutat. 2002 May;19(5):465-78. doi: 10.1002/humu.10066. Citation on PubMed Briggs MD, Wright MJ, Mortier GR. Multiple Epiphyseal Dysplasia, Autosomal
Dominant. 2003 Jan 8 [updated 2024 Jul 4]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM,
Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1123/ Citation on PubMed Jackson GC, Marcus-Soekarman D, Stolte-Dijkstra I, Verrips A, Taylor JA,
Briggs MD. Type IX collagen gene mutations can result in multiple epiphyseal
dysplasia that is associated with osteochondritis dissecans and a mild myopathy.
Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Apr;152A(4):863-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33240. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Lachman RS, Krakow D, Cohn DH, Rimoin DL. MED, COMP, multilayered and NEIN: an
overview of multiple epiphyseal dysplasia. Pediatr Radiol. 2005 Feb;35(2):116-23.
doi: 10.1007/s00247-004-1323-4. Epub 2004 Oct 21. Citation on PubMed Rossi A, Superti-Furga A. Mutations in the diastrophic dysplasia sulfate
transporter (DTDST) gene (SLC26A2): 22 novel mutations, mutation review,
associated skeletal phenotypes, and diagnostic relevance. Hum Mutat. 2001
Mar;17(3):159-71. doi: 10.1002/humu.1. Erratum In: Hum Mutat 2001;18(1):82. Citation on PubMed Seo SG, Song HR, Kim HW, Yoo WJ, Shim JS, Chung CY, Park MS, Oh CW, Jeong C,
Song KS, Kim OH, Park SS, Choi IH, Cho TJ. Comparison of orthopaedic
manifestations of multiple epiphyseal dysplasia caused by MATN3 versus COMP
mutations: a case control study. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2014 Mar 15;15:84.
doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-15-84. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Superti-Furga A, Neumann L, Riebel T, Eich G, Steinmann B, Spranger J, Kunze
J. Recessively inherited multiple epiphyseal dysplasia with normal stature, club
foot, and double layered patella caused by a DTDST mutation. J Med Genet. 1999
Aug;36(8):621-4. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Unger S, Hecht JT. Pseudoachondroplasia and multiple epiphyseal dysplasia: New
etiologic developments. Am J Med Genet. 2001 Winter;106(4):244-50. Citation on PubMed Unger S, Superti-Furga A. SLC26A2-Related Multiple Epiphyseal
Dysplasia. 2002 Aug 29 [updated 2023 Jan 19]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM,
Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1306/ Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Bone Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated November 1, 2014