Myosin storage myopathy: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Myosin storage myopathy URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/myosin-storage-myopathy/ Myosin storage myopathy To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Myosin storage myopathy is a condition that causes muscle weakness (myopathy) that does not worsen or worsens very slowly over time. This condition is characterized by the formation of protein clumps, which contain a protein called myosin, within certain muscle fibers. The signs and symptoms of myosin storage myopathy usually become noticeable in childhood, although they can occur later. Because of muscle weakness, affected individuals may start walking later than usual and have a waddling gait, trouble climbing stairs, and difficulty lifting the arms above shoulder level. Muscle weakness also causes some affected individuals to have trouble breathing. Frequency Myosin storage myopathy is a rare condition. Its prevalence is unknown. Causes Mutations in the MYH7 gene cause myosin storage myopathy. The MYH7 gene provides instructions for making a protein known as the cardiac beta (β)-myosin heavy chain. This protein is found in heart (cardiac) muscle and in type I skeletal muscle fibers, one of two types of fibers that make up the muscles that the body uses for movement. Cardiac β-myosin heavy chain is the major component of the thick filament in muscle cell structures called sarcomeres . Sarcomeres, which are made up of thick and thin filaments, are the basic units of muscle contraction. The overlapping thick and thin filaments attach to each other and release, which allows the filaments to move relative to one another so that muscles can contract. Mutations in the MYH7 gene lead to the production of an altered cardiac β-myosin heavy chain protein, which is thought to be less able to form thick filaments. The altered proteins accumulate in type I skeletal muscle fibers, forming the protein clumps characteristic of the disorder. It is unclear how these changes lead to muscle weakness in people with myosin storage myopathy. Learn more about the gene associated with Myosin storage myopathy MYH7 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition Autosomal dominant hyaline body myopathy Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Myosin storage myopathy Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Hyaline body myopathy Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CONGENITAL MYOPATHY 7A, MYOSIN STORAGE, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT; CMYO7A Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Armel TZ, Leinwand LA. Mutations in the beta-myosin rod cause myosin storage
myopathy via multiple mechanisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Apr
14;106(15):6291-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0900107106. Epub 2009 Mar 31. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Pegoraro E, Gavassini BF, Borsato C, Melacini P, Vianello A, Stramare R,
Cenacchi G, Angelini C. MYH7 gene mutation in myosin storage myopathy and
scapulo-peroneal myopathy. Neuromuscul Disord. 2007 Apr;17(4):321-9. doi:
10.1016/j.nmd.2007.01.010. Epub 2007 Mar 2. Citation on PubMed Tajsharghi H, Oldfors A. Myosinopathies: pathology and mechanisms. Acta
Neuropathol. 2013 Jan;125(1):3-18. doi: 10.1007/s00401-012-1024-2. Epub 2012 Aug
5. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Tajsharghi H, Thornell LE, Lindberg C, Lindvall B, Henriksson KG, Oldfors A.
Myosin storage myopathy associated with a heterozygous missense mutation in MYH7.
Ann Neurol. 2003 Oct;54(4):494-500. doi: 10.1002/ana.10693. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Muscle Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Muscle function loss Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2013