Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/rabson-mendenhall-syndrome/ Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by severe insulin resistance, a condition in which the body's tissues and organs do not respond properly to the hormone insulin. Insulin normally helps regulate blood sugar levels by controlling how much sugar (in the form of glucose) is passed from the bloodstream into cells to be used as energy. In people with Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome, insulin resistance impairs blood glucose regulation and ultimately leads to a condition called diabetes mellitus, in which blood glucose levels can become dangerously high. Severe insulin resistance in people with Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome  affects the development of many parts of the body. Affected individuals are unusually small starting before birth, and infants experience failure to thrive, which means they do not grow and gain weight at the expected rate. Additional features of the condition that become apparent early in life include a lack of fatty tissue under the skin (subcutaneous fat); wasting (atrophy) of muscles; dental abnormalities; excessive body hair growth (hirsutism); multiple cysts on the ovaries in females; and enlargement of the nipples, genitalia, kidneys, heart, and other organs. Most affected individuals also have a skin condition called acanthosis nigricans, in which the skin in body folds and creases becomes thick, dark, and velvety. Distinctive facial features in people with Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome include prominent, widely spaced eyes ; a broad nose; and large, low-set ears. Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome  is one of a group of related conditions described as inherited severe insulin resistance syndromes. These disorders, which also include Donohue syndrome and type A insulin resistance syndrome , are considered part of a spectrum. Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome is intermediate in severity between Donohue syndrome (which is usually fatal before age 2) and type A insulin resistance syndrome (which is often not diagnosed until adolescence). People with Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome develop signs and symptoms early in life and live into their teens or twenties. Death usually results from complications related to diabetes mellitus, such as a toxic buildup of acids called ketones in the body (diabetic ketoacidosis). Frequency Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome is estimated to affect less than 1 per million people worldwide. Several dozen cases have been reported in the medical literature. Causes Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome results from mutations in the INSR gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called an insulin receptor, which is found in many types of cells. Insulin receptors are embedded in the outer membrane surrounding the cell, where they attach (bind) to insulin circulating in the bloodstream. This binding triggers signaling pathways that influence many cell functions. The INSR gene mutations that cause Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome  reduce the number of insulin receptors that reach the cell membrane or diminish the function of these receptors. Although insulin is present in the bloodstream, without enough functional receptors it is less able to exert its effects on cells and tissues. This severe resistance to the effects of insulin impairs blood glucose regulation and affects many aspects of development in people with Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome. Learn more about the gene associated with Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome INSR Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Mendenhall syndrome Pineal hyperplasia and diabetes mellitus syndrome Pineal hyperplasia, insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus, and somatic abnormalities RMS Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PINEAL HYPERPLASIA, INSULIN-RESISTANT DIABETES MELLITUS, AND SOMATIC ABNORMALITIES Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Grasso V, Colombo C, Favalli V, Galderisi A, Rabbone I, Gombos S, Bonora E,
Massa O, Meschi F, Cerutti F, Iafusco D, Bonfanti R, Monciotti C, Barbetti F. Six
cases with severe insulin resistance (SIR) associated with mutations of insulin
receptor: Is a Bartter-like syndrome a feature of congenital SIR? Acta Diabetol.
2013 Dec;50(6):951-7. doi: 10.1007/s00592-013-0490-x. Epub 2013 Jul 4. Citation on PubMed Jiang S, Fang Q, Zhang F, Wan H, Zhang R, Wang C, Bao Y, Zhang L, Ma X, Lu J,
Gao F, Xiang K, Jia W. Functional characterization of insulin receptor gene
mutations contributing to Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome - phenotypic heterogeneity
of insulin receptor gene mutations. Endocr J. 2011;58(11):931-40. doi:
10.1507/endocrj.ej11-0032. Epub 2011 Aug 23. Citation on PubMed Longo N, Wang Y, Smith SA, Langley SD, DiMeglio LA, Giannella-Neto D.
Genotype-phenotype correlation in inherited severe insulin resistance. Hum Mol
Genet. 2002 Jun 1;11(12):1465-75. doi: 10.1093/hmg/11.12.1465. Citation on PubMed Musso C, Cochran E, Moran SA, Skarulis MC, Oral EA, Taylor S, Gorden P.
Clinical course of genetic diseases of the insulin receptor (type A and
Rabson-Mendenhall syndromes): a 30-year prospective. Medicine (Baltimore). 2004
Jul;83(4):209-222. doi: 10.1097/01.md.0000133625.73570.54. Citation on PubMed Parker VE, Semple RK. Genetics in endocrinology: genetic forms of severe
insulin resistance: what endocrinologists should know. Eur J Endocrinol. 2013 Sep
12;169(4):R71-80. doi: 10.1530/EJE-13-0327. Print 2013 Oct. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Semple RK, Savage DB, Cochran EK, Gorden P, O'Rahilly S. Genetic syndromes of
severe insulin resistance. Endocr Rev. 2011 Aug;32(4):498-514. doi:
10.1210/er.2010-0020. Epub 2011 May 2. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Blood Glucose Diabetes Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Acanthosis nigricans Diabetic ketoacidosis Failure to thrive Genetics Ovarian cysts Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 1, 2014