North American Indian childhood cirrhosis: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → North American Indian childhood cirrhosis URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/north-american-indian-childhood-cirrhosis/ North American Indian childhood cirrhosis To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description North American Indian childhood cirrhosis is a rare liver disorder that occurs in children. The liver malfunction causes yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice) in affected infants. The disorder worsens with age, progressively damaging the liver and leading to chronic, irreversible liver disease (cirrhosis) in childhood or adolescence. Unless it is treated with liver transplantation, North American Indian childhood cirrhosis typically causes life-threatening complications including liver failure. Frequency North American Indian childhood cirrhosis has been found only in children of Ojibway-Cree descent in the Abitibi region of northwestern Quebec, Canada. At least 30 affected individuals from this population have been reported. Causes North American Indian childhood cirrhosis results from at least one known mutation in the UTP4 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called cirhin, whose precise function is unknown. Within cells, cirhin is located in a structure called the nucleolus , which is a small region inside the nucleus where ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is produced. A chemical cousin of DNA, rRNA is a molecule that helps assemble protein building blocks (amino acids) into functioning proteins. Researchers believe that cirhin may play a role in processing rRNA. Studies also suggest that cirhin may function by interacting with other proteins. Cirhin is found in many different types of cells, so it is unclear why the effects of North American Indian childhood cirrhosis appear to be limited to the liver. Researchers are working to determine how a UTP4 gene mutation causes the progressive liver damage characteristic of this disorder. Learn more about the gene associated with North American Indian childhood cirrhosis UTP4 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition NAIC Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary North American Indian childhood cirrhosis Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM NORTH AMERICAN INDIAN CHILDHOOD CIRRHOSIS; NAIC Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Betard C, Rasquin-Weber A, Brewer C, Drouin E, Clark S, Verner A,
Darmond-Zwaig C, Fortin J, Mercier J, Chagnon P, Fujiwara TM, Morgan K, Richter
A, Hudson TJ, Mitchell GA. Localization of a recessive gene for North American
Indian childhood cirrhosis to chromosome region 16q22-and identification of a
shared haplotype. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Jul;67(1):222-8. doi: 10.1086/302993. Epub
2000 May 11. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Chagnon P, Michaud J, Mitchell G, Mercier J, Marion JF, Drouin E,
Rasquin-Weber A, Hudson TJ, Richter A. A missense mutation (R565W) in cirhin
(FLJ14728) in North American Indian childhood cirrhosis. Am J Hum Genet. 2002
Dec;71(6):1443-9. doi: 10.1086/344580. Epub 2002 Nov 4. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Drouin E, Russo P, Tuchweber B, Mitchell G, Rasquin-Weber A. North American
Indian cirrhosis in children: a review of 30 cases. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr.
2000 Oct;31(4):395-404. doi: 10.1097/00005176-200010000-00013. Citation on PubMed Weber AM, Tuchweber B, Yousef I, Brochu P, Turgeon C, Gabbiani G, Morin CL,
Roy CC. Severe familial cholestasis in North American Indian children: a clinical
model of microfilament dysfunction? Gastroenterology. 1981 Oct;81(4):653-62. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Cirrhosis Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Cirrhosis Genetics Jaundice Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 1, 2011