Gray platelet syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Gray platelet syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/gray-platelet-syndrome/ Gray platelet syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Gray platelet syndrome is a bleeding disorder associated with abnormal platelets, which are small blood cells involved in blood clotting. People with this condition tend to bruise easily and have an increased risk of nosebleeds (epistaxis). They may also experience abnormally heavy or extended bleeding following surgery, dental work, or minor trauma. Women with gray platelet syndrome often have irregular, heavy periods (menometrorrhagia). These bleeding problems are usually mild to moderate, but they have been life-threatening in a few affected individuals. A condition called myelofibrosis, which is a buildup of scar tissue (fibrosis) in the bone marrow, is another common feature of gray platelet syndrome. Bone marrow is the spongy tissue in the center of long bones that produces most of the blood cells the body needs, including platelets. The scarring associated with myelofibrosis damages bone marrow, preventing it from making enough blood cells. Other organs, particularly the spleen, start producing more blood cells to compensate; this process often leads to an enlarged spleen (splenomegaly). Frequency Gray platelet syndrome appears to be a rare disorder. About 60 cases have been reported worldwide. Causes Gray platelet syndrome can be caused by mutations in the NBEAL2 gene. Little is known about the protein produced from this gene. It appears to play a role in the formation of alpha-granules, which are sacs inside platelets that contain growth factors and other proteins that are important for blood clotting and wound healing . In response to an injury that causes bleeding, the proteins stored in alpha-granules help platelets stick to one another to form a plug that seals off damaged blood vessels and prevents further blood loss. Mutations in the NBEAL2 gene disrupt the normal production of alpha-granules. Without alpha-granules, platelets are unusually large and fewer in number than usual (macrothrombocytopenia). The abnormal platelets also appear gray when viewed under a microscope, which gives this condition its name. A lack of alpha-granules impairs the normal activity of platelets during blood clotting, increasing the risk of abnormal bleeding. Myelofibrosis is thought to occur because the growth factors and other proteins that are normally packaged into alpha-granules leak out into the bone marrow. The proteins lead to fibrosis that affects the bone marrow's ability to make new blood cells. Some people with gray platelet syndrome do not have an identified mutation in the NBEAL2 gene. In these individuals, the cause of the condition is unknown. Learn more about the gene associated with Gray platelet syndrome NBEAL2 Inheritance When gray platelet syndrome is caused by NBEAL2 gene mutations, it has an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene in each cell. Gray platelet syndrome can also be inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of an altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. An affected person often inherits the condition from one affected parent. Researchers are working to determine which gene or genes are associated with the autosomal dominant form of gray platelet syndrome. Other Names for This Condition BDPLT4 Bleeding disorder, platelet-type, 4 Deficient alpha granule syndrome GPS Grey platelet syndrome Platelet alpha granule deficiency Platelet alpha-granule deficiency Platelet granule defect Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Gray platelet syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Gray platelet syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM GRAY PLATELET SYNDROME; GPS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Albers CA, Cvejic A, Favier R, Bouwmans EE, Alessi MC, Bertone P, Jordan G,
Kettleborough RN, Kiddle G, Kostadima M, Read RJ, Sipos B, Sivapalaratnam S,
Smethurst PA, Stephens J, Voss K, Nurden A, Rendon A, Nurden P, Ouwehand WH.
Exome sequencing identifies NBEAL2 as the causative gene for gray platelet
syndrome. Nat Genet. 2011 Jul 17;43(8):735-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.885. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Bottega R, Pecci A, De Candia E, Pujol-Moix N, Heller PG, Noris P, De Rocco D,
Podda GM, Glembotsky AC, Cattaneo M, Balduini CL, Savoia A. Correlation between
platelet phenotype and NBEAL2 genotype in patients with congenital
thrombocytopenia and alpha-granule deficiency. Haematologica. 2013 Jun;98(6):868-74.
doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.075861. Epub 2012 Oct 25. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Gunay-Aygun M, Falik-Zaccai TC, Vilboux T, Zivony-Elboum Y, Gumruk F, Cetin M,
Khayat M, Boerkoel CF, Kfir N, Huang Y, Maynard D, Dorward H, Berger K, Kleta R,
Anikster Y, Arat M, Freiberg AS, Kehrel BE, Jurk K, Cruz P, Mullikin JC, White
JG, Huizing M, Gahl WA. NBEAL2 is mutated in gray platelet syndrome and is
required for biogenesis of platelet alpha-granules. Nat Genet. 2011 Jul
17;43(8):732-4. doi: 10.1038/ng.883. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Gunay-Aygun M, Zivony-Elboum Y, Gumruk F, Geiger D, Cetin M, Khayat M, Kleta
R, Kfir N, Anikster Y, Chezar J, Arcos-Burgos M, Shalata A, Stanescu H, Manaster
J, Arat M, Edwards H, Freiberg AS, Hart PS, Riney LC, Patzel K, Tanpaiboon P,
Markello T, Huizing M, Maric I, Horne M, Kehrel BE, Jurk K, Hansen NF, Cherukuri
PF, Jones M, Cruz P, Mullikin JC, Nurden A, White JG, Gahl WA, Falik-Zaccai T.
Gray platelet syndrome: natural history of a large patient cohort and locus
assignment to chromosome 3p. Blood. 2010 Dec 2;116(23):4990-5001. doi:
10.1182/blood-2010-05-286534. Epub 2010 Aug 13. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Kahr WH, Hinckley J, Li L, Schwertz H, Christensen H, Rowley JW, Pluthero FG,
Urban D, Fabbro S, Nixon B, Gadzinski R, Storck M, Wang K, Ryu GY, Jobe SM,
Schutte BC, Moseley J, Loughran NB, Parkinson J, Weyrich AS, Di Paola J.
Mutations in NBEAL2, encoding a BEACH protein, cause gray platelet syndrome. Nat
Genet. 2011 Jul 17;43(8):738-40. doi: 10.1038/ng.884. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Bleeding Disorders Genetic Disorders Platelet Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Myelofibrosis Splenomegaly Thrombocytopenia Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated September 1, 2014