Auriculo-condylar syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Auriculo-condylar syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/auriculo-condylar-syndrome/ Auriculo-condylar syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Auriculo-condylar syndrome is a condition that affects facial development, particularly development of the ears and lower jaw (mandible). Most people with auriculo-condylar syndrome have malformed outer ears ("auriculo-" refers to the ears). A hallmark of this condition is an ear abnormality called a " question-mark ear ," in which the ears have a distinctive question-mark shape caused by a split that separates the upper part of the ear from the earlobe. Other ear abnormalities that can occur in auriculo-condylar syndrome include cupped ears , ears with fewer folds and grooves than usual (described as "simple"), narrow ear canals, small skin tags in front of or behind the ears, and ears that are rotated backward . Some affected individuals also have hearing loss. Abnormalities of the mandible are another characteristic feature of auriculo-condylar syndrome. These abnormalities often include an unusually small chin ( micrognathia ) and malfunction of the temporomandibular joint (TMJ), which connects the lower jaw to the skull. Problems with the TMJ affect how the upper and lower jaws fit together and can make it difficult to open and close the mouth. The term "condylar" in the name of the condition refers to the mandibular condyle, which is the upper portion of the mandible that forms part of the TMJ. Other features of auriculo-condylar syndrome can include prominent cheeks, an unusually small mouth (microstomia), differences in the size and shape of facial structures between the right and left sides of the face (facial asymmetry), and an opening in the roof of the mouth ( cleft palate ). These features vary, even among affected members of the same family. Frequency Auriculo-condylar syndrome appears to be a rare disorder. More than two dozen affected individuals have been described in the medical literature. Causes Auriculo-condylar syndrome can be caused by mutations in either the GNAI3 or PLCB4 gene. These genes provide instructions for making proteins that are involved in chemical signaling within cells. They help transmit information from outside the cell to inside the cell, which instructs the cell to grow, divide, or take on specialized functions. Studies suggest that the proteins produced from the GNAI3 and PLCB4 genes contribute to the development of the first and second pharyngeal arches, which are structures in the embryo that ultimately develop into the jawbones, facial muscles, middle ear bones, ear canals, outer ears, and related tissues. Mutations in these genes alter the formation of the lower jaw: instead of developing normally, the lower jaw becomes shaped more like the smaller upper jaw (maxilla). This abnormal shape leads to micrognathia and problems with TMJ function. Researchers are working to determine how mutations in these genes lead to the other developmental abnormalities associated with auriculo-condylar syndrome. In some people with the characteristic features of auriculo-condylar syndrome, a mutation in the GNAI3 or PLCB4 gene has not been found. The cause of the condition is unknown in these individuals. Learn more about the genes associated with Auriculo-condylar syndrome GNAI3 PLCB4 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is typically sufficient to cause the disorder. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent . Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Some people who have one altered copy of the GNAI3 or PLCB4 gene have no features related to auriculo-condylar syndrome. (This situation is known as reduced penetrance.) It is unclear why some people with a mutated gene develop the condition and other people with a mutated gene do not. Other Names for This Condition Auriculocondylar syndrome Dysgnathia complex Question-mark ear syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Auriculocondylar syndrome 1 Genetic Testing Registry: Auriculocondylar syndrome 2 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Auriculocondylar syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM AURICULOCONDYLAR SYNDROME 1; ARCND1 AURICULOCONDYLAR SYNDROME 2A; ARCND2A Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Gordon CT, Vuillot A, Marlin S, Gerkes E, Henderson A, AlKindy A,
Holder-Espinasse M, Park SS, Omarjee A, Sanchis-Borja M, Bdira EB, Oufadem M,
Sikkema-Raddatz B, Stewart A, Palmer R, McGowan R, Petit F, Delobel B, Speicher
MR, Aurora P, Kilner D, Pellerin P, Simon M, Bonnefont JP, Tobias ES,
Garcia-Minaur S, Bitner-Glindzicz M, Lindholm P, Meijer BA, Abadie V, Denoyelle
F, Vazquez MP, Rotky-Fast C, Couloigner V, Pierrot S, Manach Y, Breton S,
Hendriks YM, Munnich A, Jakobsen L, Kroisel P, Lin A, Kaban LB, Basel-Vanagaite
L, Wilson L, Cunningham ML, Lyonnet S, Amiel J. Heterogeneity of mutational
mechanisms and modes of inheritance in auriculocondylar syndrome. J Med Genet.
2013 Mar;50(3):174-86. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101331. Epub 2013 Jan 12. Citation on PubMed Guion-Almeida ML, Kokitsu-Nakata NM, Zechi-Ceide RM, Vendramini S.
Auriculo-condylar syndrome: further evidence for a new disorder. Am J Med Genet.
1999 Sep 10;86(2):130-3. doi:
10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(19990910)86:23.0.co;2-o. Citation on PubMed Guion-Almeida ML, Zechi-Ceide RM, Vendramini S, Kokitsu-Nakata NM.
Auriculo-condylar syndrome: additional patients. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Oct
1;112(2):209-14. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.10631. Citation on PubMed Masotti C, Oliveira KG, Poerner F, Splendore A, Souza J, Freitas Rda S,
Zechi-Ceide R, Guion-Almeida ML, Passos-Bueno MR. Auriculo-condylar syndrome:
mapping of a first locus and evidence for genetic heterogeneity. Eur J Hum Genet.
2008 Feb;16(2):145-52. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201955. Epub 2007 Nov 14. Citation on PubMed McGowan R, Murday V, Kinning E, Garcia S, Koppel D, Whiteford M. Novel
features in auriculo-condylar syndrome. Clin Dysmorphol. 2011 Jan;20(1):1-10.
doi: 10.1097/MCD.0b013e32833e56f5. Citation on PubMed Rieder MJ, Green GE, Park SS, Stamper BD, Gordon CT, Johnson JM, Cunniff CM,
Smith JD, Emery SB, Lyonnet S, Amiel J, Holder M, Heggie AA, Bamshad MJ,
Nickerson DA, Cox TC, Hing AV, Horst JA, Cunningham ML. A human homeotic
transformation resulting from mutations in PLCB4 and GNAI3 causes
auriculocondylar syndrome. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 May 4;90(5):907-14. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.04.002. Erratum In: Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Aug 10;91(2):397. Am
J Hum Genet. 2012 Jun 8;90(6):1116. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Storm AL, Johnson JM, Lammer E, Green GE, Cunniff C. Auriculo-condylar
syndrome is associated with highly variable ear and mandibular defects in
multiple kindreds. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Oct 1;138A(2):141-5. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.30883. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Ear Disorders Genetic Disorders Jaw Injuries and Disorders Temporomandibular Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Cleft lip and palate Genetics Low-set ears and pinna abnormalities Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated January 1, 2013