Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/nakajo-nishimura-syndrome/ Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome is an inherited condition that affects many parts of the body and has been described only in the Japanese population. Beginning in infancy or early childhood, affected individuals develop red, swollen lumps (nodular erythema) on the skin that occur most often in cold weather; recurrent fevers; and elongated fingers and toes with widened and rounded tips (clubbing). Later in childhood, affected individuals develop joint pain and joint deformities called contractures that limit movement, particularly in the hands, wrists, and elbows. They also experience weakness and wasting of muscles, along with a loss of fatty tissue (lipodystrophy), mainly in the upper body. The combination of muscle and fat loss worsens over time, leading to an extremely thin (emaciated) appearance in the face, chest, and arms. Other signs and symptoms of Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome can include an enlarged liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly), a shortage of red blood cells ( anemia ), a reduced amount of blood cells called platelets (thrombocytopenia), and abnormal deposits of calcium (calcification) in an area of the brain called the basal ganglia. Intellectual disability has been reported in some affected individuals. The signs and symptoms of Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome overlap with those of two other conditions: one called joint contractures, muscular atrophy, microcytic anemia, and panniculitis-induced lipodystrophy (JMP) syndrome; and the other called chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with lipodystrophy and elevated temperature (CANDLE) syndrome. All three conditions are characterized by skin abnormalities and lipodystrophy. Although they are often considered separate disorders, they are caused by mutations in the same gene, and some researchers believe they may represent different forms of a single condition. Frequency Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome appears to be rare and has been described only in the Japanese population. About 30 cases have been reported in the medical literature. Causes Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome is caused by mutations in the PSMB8 gene. This gene provides instructions for making one part (subunit) of specialized cell structures called immunoproteasomes, which are found primarily in immune system cells. Immunoproteasomes  play an important role in regulating the immune system's response to foreign invaders, such as viruses and bacteria. One of the primary functions of immunoproteasomes is to help the immune system distinguish the body's own proteins from proteins made by foreign invaders, so the immune system can respond appropriately to infection. Mutations in the PSMB8 gene greatly reduce the amount of protein produced from the PSMB8 gene, which impairs the normal assembly of immunoproteasomes and causes the immune system to malfunction. For unknown reasons, the malfunctioning  immune system triggers abnormal inflammation that can damage the body's own tissues and organs; as a result, Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome is classified as an autoinflammatory disorder. Abnormal inflammation likely underlies many of the signs and symptoms of Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome, including the nodular erythema, recurrent fevers, joint problems, and hepatosplenomegaly. It is less clear how mutations in the PSMB8 gene lead to muscle wasting and lipodystrophy. Studies suggest that the protein produced from the PSMB8 gene may play a separate role in the maturation of fat cells (adipocytes), and a shortage of this protein may interfere with the normal development and function of these cells. Learn more about the gene associated with Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome PSMB8 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition ALDD Autoinflammation, lipodystrophy, and dermatosis syndrome Japanese autoinflammatory syndrome with lipodystrophy JASL Nakajo syndrome NKJO Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Proteasome-associated autoinflammatory syndrome 1 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Proteasome-associated autoinflammatory syndrome 1 Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PROTEASOME-ASSOCIATED AUTOINFLAMMATORY SYNDROME 1; PRAAS1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Arima K, Kinoshita A, Mishima H, Kanazawa N, Kaneko T, Mizushima T, Ichinose
K, Nakamura H, Tsujino A, Kawakami A, Matsunaka M, Kasagi S, Kawano S, Kumagai S,
Ohmura K, Mimori T, Hirano M, Ueno S, Tanaka K, Tanaka M, Toyoshima I, Sugino H,
Yamakawa A, Tanaka K, Niikawa N, Furukawa F, Murata S, Eguchi K, Ida H, Yoshiura
K. Proteasome assembly defect due to a proteasome subunit beta type 8 (PSMB8)
mutation causes the autoinflammatory disorder, Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Sep 6;108(36):14914-9. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1106015108.
Epub 2011 Aug 18. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Kanazawa N. Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome: an autoinflammatory disorder showing
pernio-like rashes and progressive partial lipodystrophy. Allergol Int. 2012
Jun;61(2):197-206. doi: 10.2332/allergolint.11-RAI-0416. Epub 2012 Mar 25. Citation on PubMed Kitamura A, Maekawa Y, Uehara H, Izumi K, Kawachi I, Nishizawa M, Toyoshima Y,
Takahashi H, Standley DM, Tanaka K, Hamazaki J, Murata S, Obara K, Toyoshima I,
Yasutomo K. A mutation in the immunoproteasome subunit PSMB8 causes
autoinflammation and lipodystrophy in humans. J Clin Invest. 2011
Oct;121(10):4150-60. doi: 10.1172/JCI58414. Epub 2011 Sep 1. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Kitano Y, Matsunaga E, Morimoto T, Okada N, Sano S. A syndrome with nodular
erythema, elongated and thickened fingers, and emaciation. Arch Dermatol. 1985
Aug;121(8):1053-6. Citation on PubMed Kunimoto K, Kimura A, Uede K, Okuda M, Aoyagi N, Furukawa F, Kanazawa N. A new
infant case of Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome with a genetic mutation in the
immunoproteasome subunit: an overlapping entity with JMP and CANDLE syndrome
related to PSMB8 mutations. Dermatology. 2013;227(1):26-30. doi:
10.1159/000351323. Epub 2013 Aug 8. Citation on PubMed Tanaka M, Miyatani N, Yamada S, Miyashita K, Toyoshima I, Sakuma K, Tanaka K,
Yuasa T, Miyatake T, Tsubaki T. Hereditary lipo-muscular atrophy with joint
contracture, skin eruptions and hyper-gamma-globulinemia: a new syndrome. Intern
Med. 1993 Jan;32(1):42-5. doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.32.42. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Fever Genetic Disorders Skin Conditions MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Clubbed Fingers (Image) Genetics Immune response Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated November 1, 2013