Dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/dopamine-beta-hydroxylase-deficiency/ Dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency is a condition that affects the autonomic nervous system, which controls involuntary body processes such as the regulation of blood pressure and body temperature. The signs and symptoms of dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency are caused by a lack of norepinephrine, one of the main chemical messengers (neurotransmitters) of the autonomic nervous system. Although the signs and symptoms of dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency can appear during infancy, people often do not receive a diagnosis until their symptoms worsen during adolescence. Early signs and symptoms may include droopy eyelids ( ptosis ) and low blood pressure (hypotension). Infants with dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency may also experience vomiting, dehydration, decreased body temperature, and low blood glucose (hypoglycemia), which may lead to frequent hospitalizations. By adolescence or early adulthood, people with dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency often have a sharp drop in blood pressure upon standing ( orthostatic hypotension ), which can cause dizziness, blurred vision, or fainting. Affected individuals typically experience extreme fatigue during exercise (exercise intolerance) due to their problems maintaining a normal blood pressure. Other features of dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency include nasal congestion, an inability to stand for a prolonged period of time, and retrograde ejaculation, which is a discharge of semen backwards into the bladder. Symptoms of dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency may improve with treatment. If the condition is not treated, symptoms often worsen during adolescence. Frequency Dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency is a very rare disorder. As of 2021, approximately 25 individuals with this condition have been described in the scientific literature. Causes Variants (also called mutations) in the DBH gene cause dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency.  The DBH gene provides instructions for producing the enzyme dopamine beta-hydroxylase. This enzyme converts dopamine to norepinephrine. Both dopamine and norepinephrine are neurotransmitters that transmit signals from nerve cells to other cells in the body. The variants in the DBH gene that cause dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency prevent the dopamine beta-hydroxylase enzyme from functioning properly. People who lack functional dopamine beta-hydroxylase cannot convert dopamine to norepinephrine. This leads to orthostatic hypotension , exercise intolerance, and the other autonomic nervous system problems seen in people with dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency. Learn more about the gene associated with Dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency DBH Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell must have a variant to cause the disorder. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition DBH deficiency Dopamine β-hydroxylase deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Orthostatic hypotension 1 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM ORTHOSTATIC HYPOTENSION 1; ORTHYP1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Biaggioni I. Dopamine Beta-Hydroxylase Deficiency. 2003 Sep 4 [updated 2024
Sep 26]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A,
editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of
Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1474/ Citation on PubMed Kim CH, Zabetian CP, Cubells JF, Cho S, Biaggioni I, Cohen BM, Robertson D,
Kim KS. Mutations in the dopamine beta-hydroxylase gene are associated with human
norepinephrine deficiency. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Mar 1;108(2):140-7. Citation on PubMed Robertson D. The pathophysiology and diagnosis of orthostatic hypotension.
Clin Auton Res. 2008 Mar;18 Suppl 1:2-7. doi: 10.1007/s10286-007-1004-0. Epub
2008 Mar 27. Citation on PubMed Senard JM, Rouet P. Dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency. Orphanet J Rare Dis.
2006 Mar 30;1:7. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-7. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Vincent S, Robertson D. The broader view: catecholamine abnormalities. Clin
Auton Res. 2002 May;12 Suppl 1:I44-9. doi: 10.1007/s102860200018. Citation on PubMed Wassenberg T, Deinum J, van Ittersum FJ, Kamsteeg EJ, Pennings M, Verbeek MM,
Wevers RA, van Albada ME, Kema IP, Versmissen J, van den Meiracker T, Lenders
JWM, Monnens L, Willemsen MA. Clinical presentation and long-term follow-up of
dopamine beta hydroxylase deficiency. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2021
May;44(3):554-565. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12321. Epub 2020 Oct 15. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Autonomic Nervous System Disorders Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated July 31, 2024