Sheldon-Hall syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Sheldon-Hall syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/sheldon-hall-syndrome/ Sheldon-Hall syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Sheldon-Hall syndrome, also known as distal arthrogryposis type 2B, is a disorder characterized by joint deformities (contractures) that restrict movement in the hands and feet. The term "arthrogryposis" comes from the Greek words for joint (arthro-) and crooked or hooked (gryposis). "Distal" refers to areas of the body away from the center. The characteristic features of this condition include permanently bent fingers and toes ( camptodactyly ), overlapping fingers , and a hand deformity called ulnar deviation in which all of the fingers are angled outward toward the fifth (pinky) finger. Inward- and upward-turning feet (a condition called clubfoot ) is also commonly seen in Sheldon-Hall syndrome. The specific hand and foot abnormalities vary among affected individuals; the abnormalities are present at birth and generally do not get worse over time. People with Sheldon-Hall syndrome also usually have distinctive facial features, which include a triangular face ; outside corners of the eyes that point downward ( down-slanting palpebral fissures ); deep folds in the skin between the nose and lips ( nasolabial folds ); and a small mouth with a high, arched roof of the mouth (palate) . Other features that may occur in Sheldon-Hall syndrome include extra folds of skin on the neck ( webbed neck ) and short stature. Sheldon-Hall syndrome does not usually affect other parts of the body, and intelligence and life expectancy are normal in this disorder. Frequency The prevalence of Sheldon-Hall syndrome is unknown; however, it is thought to be the most common type of distal arthrogryposis. About 100 affected individuals have been described in the medical literature. Causes Sheldon-Hall syndrome can be caused by mutations in the MYH3 , TNNI2 , TNNT3 , or TPM2 gene. These genes provide instructions for making proteins that are involved in muscle tensing (contraction). Muscle contraction occurs when thick filaments made of proteins called myosins slide past thin filaments made of proteins called actins . The MYH3 gene provides instructions for making a myosin protein that is normally active only before birth and is important for early development of the muscles. The process of muscle contraction is controlled (regulated) by other proteins called troponins and tropomyosins, which affect the interaction of myosin and actin .  Certain troponin proteins are produced from the TNNI2 and TNNT3 genes. The TPM2 gene provides instructions for making a tropomyosin protein. Mutations in the MYH3 , TNNI2 , TNNT3 , or TPM2 gene likely interfere with normal muscle development or prevent muscle contractions from being properly controlled, resulting in the contractures and other muscle and skeletal abnormalities associated with Sheldon-Hall syndrome. It is unknown why the contractures mainly affect the hands and feet or how these gene mutations are related to other features of this disorder. Learn more about the genes associated with Sheldon-Hall syndrome MYH3 TNNI2 TNNT3 TPM2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In about 50 percent of cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent .  Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Other Names for This Condition Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita, distal, type 2B DA2B Distal arthrogryposis type 2B SHS Additional Information & Resources Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM ARTHROGRYPOSIS, DISTAL, TYPE 2B1; DA2B1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bamshad M, Van Heest AE, Pleasure D. Arthrogryposis: a review and update. J
Bone Joint Surg Am. 2009 Jul;91 Suppl 4(Suppl 4):40-6. doi: 10.2106/JBJS.I.00281.
No abstract available. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Beck AE, McMillin MJ, Gildersleeve HI, Kezele PR, Shively KM, Carey JC,
Regnier M, Bamshad MJ. Spectrum of mutations that cause distal arthrogryposis
types 1 and 2B. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Mar;161A(3):550-5. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.35809. Epub 2013 Feb 7. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Sung SS, Brassington AM, Grannatt K, Rutherford A, Whitby FG, Krakowiak PA,
Jorde LB, Carey JC, Bamshad M. Mutations in genes encoding fast-twitch
contractile proteins cause distal arthrogryposis syndromes. Am J Hum Genet. 2003
Mar;72(3):681-90. doi: 10.1086/368294. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Toydemir RM, Bamshad MJ. Sheldon-Hall syndrome. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2009 Mar
23;4:11. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-4-11. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Toydemir RM, Rutherford A, Whitby FG, Jorde LB, Carey JC, Bamshad MJ.
Mutations in embryonic myosin heavy chain (MYH3) cause Freeman-Sheldon syndrome
and Sheldon-Hall syndrome. Nat Genet. 2006 May;38(5):561-5. doi: 10.1038/ng1775.
Epub 2006 Apr 16. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Joint Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Clubfoot Contracture deformity Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 1, 2015