Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/autosomal-dominant-nocturnal-frontal-lobe-epilepsy/ Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) is an uncommon form of epilepsy that runs in families. This disorder causes seizures that usually occur at night (nocturnally) while an affected person is sleeping. Some people with ADNFLE also have seizures during the day. The seizures characteristic of ADNFLE tend to occur in clusters, with each one lasting from a few seconds to a few minutes. Some people have mild seizures that simply cause them to wake up from sleep. Others have more severe episodes that can include sudden, repetitive movements such as flinging or throwing motions of the arms and bicycling movements of the legs. The person may get out of bed and wander around, which can be mistaken for sleepwalking. The person may also cry out or make moaning, gasping, or grunting sounds. These episodes are sometimes misdiagnosed as nightmares, night terrors, or panic attacks. In some types of epilepsy, including ADNFLE, a pattern of neurological symptoms called an aura often precedes a seizure. The most common symptoms associated with an aura in people with ADNFLE are tingling, shivering, a sense of fear, dizziness (vertigo), and a feeling of falling or being pushed. Some affected people have also reported a feeling of breathlessness, overly fast breathing (hyperventilation), or choking. It is unclear what brings on seizures in people with ADNFLE. Episodes may be triggered by stress or fatigue, but in most cases the seizures do not have any recognized triggers. The seizures associated with ADNFLE can begin anytime from infancy to mid-adulthood, but most begin in childhood. The episodes tend to become milder and less frequent with age. In most affected people, the seizures can be effectively controlled with medication. Most people with ADNFLE are intellectually normal, and there are no problems with their brain function between seizures. However, some people with ADNFLE have experienced psychiatric disorders (such as schizophrenia ), behavioral problems, or intellectual disability.  It is unclear whether these additional features are directly related to epilepsy in these individuals. Frequency ADNFLE appears to be an uncommon form of epilepsy; its prevalence is unknown.  This condition has been reported in more than 100 families worldwide. Causes Mutations in the CHRNA2 , CHRNA4 , and CHRNB2 genes can cause ADNFLE. These genes provide instructions for making different parts (subunits) of a larger molecule called a neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR). This receptor plays an important role in chemical signaling between nerve cells (neurons) in the brain. Communication between neurons depends on chemicals called neurotransmitters , which are released from one neuron and taken up by neighboring neurons. Researchers believe that mutations in the CHRNA2 , CHRNA4 , and CHRNB2 genes affect the normal release and uptake of certain neurotransmitters in the brain.  The resulting changes in signaling between neurons likely trigger the abnormal brain activity associated with seizures. The seizures associated with ADNFLE begin in areas of the brain called the frontal lobes . These regions of the brain are involved in many critical functions, including reasoning, planning, judgment, and problem-solving. It is unclear why mutations in the CHRNA2 , CHRNA4 , and CHRNB2 genes cause seizures in the frontal lobes rather than elsewhere in the brain. Researchers are also working to determine why these seizures occur most often during sleep. The genetic cause of ADNFLE has been identified in only a small percentage of affected families. In some cases, a gene other than those that make up the nAChR are involved. In the remaining families, the cause of the condition is unknown. Researchers are searching for other genetic changes, including mutations in other subunits of nAChR, that may underlie the condition. Learn more about the genes associated with Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy CHRNA2 CHRNA4 CHRNB2 KCNT1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to raise the risk of developing epilepsy. About 70 percent of people who inherit a mutation in the CHRNA2 , CHRNA4 , or CHRNB2 gene will develop seizures. In most cases, an affected person has one affected parent and other relatives with the condition. Other cases are described as sporadic, which means an affected person has no family history of the disorder. Other Names for This Condition ADNFLE Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy 1 Genetic Testing Registry: Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy 2 Genetic Testing Registry: Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy 3 Genetic Testing Registry: Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy 4 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM EPILEPSY, NOCTURNAL FRONTAL LOBE, 1; ENFL1 EPILEPSY, NOCTURNAL FRONTAL LOBE, 2; ENFL2 EPILEPSY, NOCTURNAL FRONTAL LOBE, 3; ENFL3 EPILEPSY, NOCTURNAL FRONTAL LOBE, 4; ENFL4 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Combi R, Dalpra L, Tenchini ML, Ferini-Strambi L. Autosomal dominant nocturnal
frontal lobe epilepsy--a critical overview. J Neurol. 2004 Aug;251(8):923-34.
doi: 10.1007/s00415-004-0541-x. Citation on PubMed De Marco EV, Gambardella A, Annesi F, Labate A, Carrideo S, Forabosco P,
Civitelli D, Candiano IC, Tarantino P, Annesi G, Quattrone A. Further evidence of
genetic heterogeneity in families with autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe
epilepsy. Epilepsy Res. 2007 Apr;74(1):70-3. doi:
10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2006.12.006. Epub 2007 Feb 26. Citation on PubMed di Corcia G, Blasetti A, De Simone M, Verrotti A, Chiarelli F. Recent advances
on autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy: "understanding the
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR)". Eur J Paediatr Neurol.
2005;9(2):59-66. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2004.12.006. Citation on PubMed Hayman M, Scheffer IE, Chinvarun Y, Berlangieri SU, Berkovic SF. Autosomal
dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy: demonstration of focal frontal onset
and intrafamilial variation. Neurology. 1997 Oct;49(4):969-75. doi:
10.1212/wnl.49.4.969. Citation on PubMed Kurahashi H, Hirose S. Autosomal Dominant Sleep-Related Hypermotor
(Hyperkinetic) Epilepsy. 2002 May 16 [updated 2023 Mar 23]. In: Adam MP, Feldman
J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R)
[Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available
from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1169/ Citation on PubMed Marini C, Guerrini R. The role of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in
sleep-related epilepsy. Biochem Pharmacol. 2007 Oct 15;74(8):1308-14. doi:
10.1016/j.bcp.2007.06.030. Epub 2007 Jun 23. Citation on PubMed Oldani A, Zucconi M, Asselta R, Modugno M, Bonati MT, Dalpra L, Malcovati M,
Tenchini ML, Smirne S, Ferini-Strambi L. Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal
lobe epilepsy. A video-polysomnographic and genetic appraisal of 40 patients and
delineation of the epileptic syndrome. Brain. 1998 Feb;121 ( Pt 2):205-23. doi:
10.1093/brain/121.2.205. Citation on PubMed Provini F, Plazzi G, Tinuper P, Vandi S, Lugaresi E, Montagna P. Nocturnal
frontal lobe epilepsy. A clinical and polygraphic overview of 100 consecutive
cases. Brain. 1999 Jun;122 ( Pt 6):1017-31. doi: 10.1093/brain/122.6.1017. Citation on PubMed Scheffer IE, Bhatia KP, Lopes-Cendes I, Fish DR, Marsden CD, Andermann E,
Andermann F, Desbiens R, Keene D, Cendes F, et al. Autosomal dominant nocturnal
frontal lobe epilepsy. A distinctive clinical disorder. Brain. 1995 Feb;118 ( Pt
1):61-73. doi: 10.1093/brain/118.1.61. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Epilepsy Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Epilepsy Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated April 1, 2009