Camurati-Engelmann disease: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Camurati-Engelmann disease URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/camurati-engelmann-disease/ Camurati-Engelmann disease To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Camurati-Engelmann disease is a skeletal condition that is characterized by  abnormally thick bones (hyperostosis)  in the arms, legs, and skull. The thick limb bones can lead to bone pain and muscle weakness in the arms and legs and cause individuals with Camurati-Engelmann disease to tire quickly. Bone pain ranges from mild to severe and can increase with stress, activity, or cold weather. Leg weakness can make it difficult to stand up from a seated position and some affected individuals develop a waddling or unsteady walk. Additional limb abnormalities include joint deformities (contractures), knock knees, and flat feet ( pes planus ). Swelling and redness (erythema) of the limbs and an abnormal curvature of the spine can also occur. Individuals with Camurati-Engelmann disease may have an unusually thick skull, which can lead to an abnormally large head ( macrocephaly ) and lower jaw (mandible), a prominent forehead ( frontal bossing ), and bulging eyes with shallow eye sockets ( ocular proptosis ). These changes to the head and face become more prominent with age and are most noticeable in affected adults. In about a quarter of individuals with Camurati-Engelmann disease, the thickened skull increases pressure on the brain or compresses the spinal cord, which can cause a variety of neurological problems, including headaches, hearing loss, vision problems, dizziness (vertigo), ringing in the ears (tinnitus), and facial paralysis. The degree of hyperostosis varies among individuals with Camurati-Engelmann disease as does the age at which they experience their first symptoms. Other, rare features of Camurati-Engelmann disease include abnormally long limbs in proportion to height, a decrease in muscle mass and body fat, delayed teething (dentition), frequent cavities, delayed puberty, a shortage of red blood cells ( anemia ), an enlarged liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly), thinning of the skin, and excessively sweaty (hyperhidrotic) hands and feet. Frequency The prevalence of Camurati-Engelmann disease is unknown. More than 300 cases have been reported worldwide. Causes Mutations in the TGFB1 gene cause Camurati-Engelmann disease. The TGFB1 gene provides instructions for producing a protein called transforming growth factor beta-1 (TGFβ-1). The TGFβ-1 protein triggers chemical signals that regulate various cell activities, including the growth and division (proliferation) of cells, the maturation of cells to carry out specific functions (differentiation), cell movement (motility), and controlled cell death (apoptosis ). The TGFβ-1 protein is found throughout the body but is particularly abundant in tissues that make up the skeleton, where it helps regulate the formation and growth of bone and cartilage, a tough, flexible tissue that makes up much of the skeleton during early development. TGFβ-1 is involved in different processes in other tissues. The TGFB1 gene mutations that cause Camurati-Engelmann disease result in the production of an overly active TGFβ-1 protein. This abnormal TGFβ-1 protein activity causes an increase in signaling, which leads to more bone formation. As a result, the bones in the arms, legs, and skull are thicker than normal, contributing to the movement and neurological problems often experienced by individuals with Camurati-Engelmann disease. Some individuals with Camurati-Engelmann disease do not have an identified mutation in the TGFB1 gene. In these cases, the  cause of the condition is unknown. Learn more about the gene associated with Camurati-Engelmann disease TGFB1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent . Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Some people who have the altered gene never develop the condition, a situation known as reduced penetrance. Other Names for This Condition Camurati-Engelmann syndrome CED Diaphyseal dysplasia Diaphyseal hyperostosis Diaphyseal osteosclerosis Engelmann disease PDD Progressive diaphyseal dysplasia Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Diaphyseal dysplasia Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Camurati-Engelmann disease Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CAMURATI-ENGELMANN DISEASE; CAEND CAMURATI-ENGELMANN DISEASE, TYPE 2 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Carlson ML, Beatty CW, Neff BA, Link MJ, Driscoll CL. Skull base
manifestations of Camurati-Engelmann disease. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg.
2010 Jun;136(6):566-75. doi: 10.1001/archoto.2010.68. Citation on PubMed Janssens K, ten Dijke P, Ralston SH, Bergmann C, Van Hul W. Transforming
growth factor-beta 1 mutations in Camurati-Engelmann disease lead to increased
signaling by altering either activation or secretion of the mutant protein. J
Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 28;278(9):7718-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M208857200. Epub 2002 Dec
18. Citation on PubMed Janssens K, Vanhoenacker F, Bonduelle M, Verbruggen L, Van Maldergem L,
Ralston S, Guanabens N, Migone N, Wientroub S, Divizia MT, Bergmann C, Bennett C,
Simsek S, Melancon S, Cundy T, Van Hul W. Camurati-Engelmann disease: review of
the clinical, radiological, and molecular data of 24 families and implications
for diagnosis and treatment. J Med Genet. 2006 Jan;43(1):1-11. doi:
10.1136/jmg.2005.033522. Epub 2005 May 13. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Wallace SE, Lachman RS, Mekikian PB, Bui KK, Wilcox WR. Marked phenotypic
variability in progressive diaphyseal dysplasia (Camurati-Engelmann disease):
report of a four-generation pedigree, identification of a mutation in TGFB1, and
review. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Sep 1;129A(3):235-47. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30148. Citation on PubMed Yuldashev AJ, Shin CH, Kim YS, Jang WY, Park MS, Chae JH, Yoo WJ, Choi IH, Kim
OH, Cho TJ. Orthopedic Manifestations of Type I Camurati-Engelmann Disease. Clin
Orthop Surg. 2017 Mar;9(1):109-115. doi: 10.4055/cios.2017.9.1.109. Epub 2017 Feb
13. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Zhao L, Hantash BM. TGF-beta1 regulates differentiation of bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells. Vitam Horm. 2011;87:127-41. doi:
10.1016/B978-0-12-386015-6.00042-1. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Bone Density Bone Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Bone mineral density test Bone pain or tenderness Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated November 1, 2017