Microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type II: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type II URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/microcephalic-osteodysplastic-primordial-dwarfism-type-ii/ Microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type II To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type II (MOPDII) is a condition characterized by short stature (dwarfism) with other skeletal abnormalities (osteodysplasia) and an unusually small head size (microcephaly). The growth problems in MOPDII are primordial, meaning they begin before birth, with affected individuals showing slow prenatal growth (intrauterine growth retardation). After birth, affected individuals continue to grow at a very slow rate. The final adult height of people with this condition ranges from 20 inches to 40 inches. Other skeletal abnormalities in MOPDII include abnormal development of the hip joints (hip dysplasia), thinning of the bones in the arms and legs, an abnormal side-to-side curvature of the spine ( scoliosis ), and shortened wrist bones. In people with MOPDII head growth slows over time; affected individuals have an adult brain size comparable to that of a 3-month-old infant. However, intellectual development is typically normal. People with this condition have a high-pitched, nasal voice and some have a narrowing of the voicebox (subglottic stenosis). Facial features characteristic of MOPDII include a prominent nose, full cheeks, a long midface, and a small jaw. Other signs and symptoms seen in some people with MOPDII include small teeth (microdontia) and farsightedness . Over time, affected individuals may develop areas of abnormally light or dark skin coloring (pigmentation). Many individuals with MOPDII have blood vessel abnormalities. For example, some affected individuals develop a bulge in one of the blood vessels at the center of the brain ( intracranial aneurysm ). These aneurysms are dangerous because they can burst, causing bleeding within the brain. Some affected individuals have Moyamoya disease , in which arteries at the base of the brain are narrowed, leading to restricted blood flow. These vascular abnormalities are often treatable, though they increase the risk of stroke and reduce the life expectancy of affected individuals. Frequency MOPDII appears to be a rare condition, although its prevalence is unknown. Causes Mutations in the PCNT gene cause MOPDII. The PCNT gene provides instructions for making a protein called pericentrin. Within cells, this protein is located in structures called centrosomes. Centrosomes play a role in cell division and the assembly of microtubules. Microtubules are fibers that help cells maintain their shape, assist in the process of cell division, and are essential for the transport of materials within cells. Pericentrin acts as an anchoring protein, securing other proteins to the centrosome. Through its interactions with these proteins, pericentrin plays a role in regulation of the cell cycle , which is the cell's way of replicating itself in an organized, step-by-step fashion. PCNT gene mutations lead to the production of a nonfunctional pericentrin protein that cannot anchor other proteins to the centrosome. As a result, centrosomes cannot properly assemble microtubules, leading to disruption of the cell cycle and cell division. Impaired cell division causes a reduction in cell production, while disruption of the cell cycle can lead to cell death. This overall reduction in the number of cells leads to short bones, microcephaly, and the other signs and symptoms of MOPDII. Learn more about the gene associated with Microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type II PCNT Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Majewski osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type II MOPD2 MOPDII Osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type II Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type II Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type II Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MICROCEPHALIC OSTEODYSPLASTIC PRIMORDIAL DWARFISM, TYPE II; MOPD2 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bober MB, Khan N, Kaplan J, Lewis K, Feinstein JA, Scott CI Jr, Steinberg GK.
Majewski osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type II (MOPD II): expanding the
vascular phenotype. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Apr;152A(4):960-5. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.33252. Citation on PubMed Hall JG, Flora C, Scott CI Jr, Pauli RM, Tanaka KI. Majewski osteodysplastic
primordial dwarfism type II (MOPD II): natural history and clinical findings. Am
J Med Genet A. 2004 Sep 15;130A(1):55-72. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30203. Citation on PubMed Rauch A, Thiel CT, Schindler D, Wick U, Crow YJ, Ekici AB, van Essen AJ,
Goecke TO, Al-Gazali L, Chrzanowska KH, Zweier C, Brunner HG, Becker K, Curry CJ,
Dallapiccola B, Devriendt K, Dorfler A, Kinning E, Megarbane A, Meinecke P,
Semple RK, Spranger S, Toutain A, Trembath RC, Voss E, Wilson L, Hennekam R, de
Zegher F, Dorr HG, Reis A. Mutations in the pericentrin (PCNT) gene cause
primordial dwarfism. Science. 2008 Feb 8;319(5864):816-9. doi:
10.1126/science.1151174. Epub 2008 Jan 3. Citation on PubMed Willems M, Genevieve D, Borck G, Baumann C, Baujat G, Bieth E, Edery P, Farra
C, Gerard M, Heron D, Leheup B, Le Merrer M, Lyonnet S, Martin-Coignard D,
Mathieu M, Thauvin-Robinet C, Verloes A, Colleaux L, Munnich A, Cormier-Daire V.
Molecular analysis of pericentrin gene (PCNT) in a series of 24
Seckel/microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type II (MOPD II)
families. J Med Genet. 2010 Dec;47(12):797-802. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.067298.
Epub 2009 Jul 29. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Dwarfism Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Microcephaly Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2018