Deafness-infertility syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Deafness-infertility syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/deafness-infertility-syndrome/ Deafness-infertility syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Deafness-infertility syndrome is a condition characterized by hearing loss and difficulty conceiving children (a condition called infertility). Affected individuals have moderate to severe sensorineural hearing loss, which is caused by abnormalities in the inner ear . The hearing loss is typically diagnosed in early childhood and does not worsen over time. Individuals with this condition produce sperm that have decreased movement (motility). As a result, they cannot conceive without assisted reproductive technologies. Frequency The prevalence of deafness-infertility syndrome is unknown. It is likely  under diagnosed in people with hearing loss. Causes Deafness-infertility syndrome is caused by a deletion of genetic material on the long (q) arm of chromosome 15 . The signs and symptoms of deafness-infertility syndrome are related to the loss of multiple genes in this region. The size of the deletion varies among affected individuals. Researchers have determined that the loss of two specific genes on chromosome 15 is responsible for the main features of this condition. The loss of the STRC gene, which plays a role in the generation of nerve impulses that get interpreted as sound, is responsible for hearing loss. The loss of another gene, CATSPER2 , which plays a role in sperm motility, is responsible for the sperm abnormalities. Researchers are working to determine how the loss of additional genes in the deleted region affects people with deafness-infertility syndrome. Learn more about the genes and chromosome associated with Deafness-infertility syndrome CATSPER2 STRC chromosome 15 Inheritance Deafness-infertility syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of chromosome 15 in each cell have a deletion . The parents of an individual with deafness-infertility syndrome each carry one copy of the chromosome 15 deletion, but they typically do not show symptoms of the condition. Males (with one Y chromosome) who have two chromosome 15 deletions in each cell have deafness-infertility syndrome. Females (with two X chromosomes) who have two chromosome 15 deletions in each cell have sensorineural deafness as their only symptom. They do not produce sperm and so are not affected by the CATSPER2 gene deletions. Other Names for This Condition Chromosome 15q15.3 deletion syndrome DIS Sensorineural deafness and infertility Sensorineural deafness and male infertility Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Deafness-infertility syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Deafness-infertility syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM DEAFNESS-INFERTILITY SYNDROME; DIS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Avidan N, Tamary H, Dgany O, Cattan D, Pariente A, Thulliez M, Borot N, Moati
L, Barthelme A, Shalmon L, Krasnov T, Ben-Asher E, Olender T, Khen M, Yaniv I,
Zaizov R, Shalev H, Delaunay J, Fellous M, Lancet D, Beckmann JS. CATSPER2, a
human autosomal nonsyndromic male infertility gene. Eur J Hum Genet. 2003
Jul;11(7):497-502. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200991. Citation on PubMed Hildebrand MS, Avenarius MR, Smith RJH. CATSPER-Related Male
Infertility - RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY. 2009 Dec 3 [updated
2017 Mar 23]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A,
editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of
Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK22925/ Citation on PubMed Nishio SY, Usami SI. Frequency of the STRC-CATSPER2 deletion in
STRC-associated hearing loss patients. Sci Rep. 2022 Jan 12;12(1):634. doi:
10.1038/s41598-021-04688-5. Citation on PubMed Quill TA, Sugden SA, Rossi KL, Doolittle LK, Hammer RE, Garbers DL.
Hyperactivated sperm motility driven by CatSper2 is required for fertilization.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Dec 9;100(25):14869-74. doi:
10.1073/pnas.2136654100. Epub 2003 Dec 1. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Zhang Y, Malekpour M, Al-Madani N, Kahrizi K, Zanganeh M, Lohr NJ, Mohseni M,
Mojahedi F, Daneshi A, Najmabadi H, Smith RJ. Sensorineural deafness and male
infertility: a contiguous gene deletion syndrome. J Med Genet. 2007
Apr;44(4):233-40. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2006.045765. Epub 2006 Nov 10. Erratum In: J
Med Genet. 2007 Aug;44(8):544. Lohr, Naomi J [added]. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Assisted Reproductive Technology Genetic Disorders Hearing Disorders and Deafness Male Infertility MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Sensorineural deafness Related Medical Tests Hearing Tests for Adults Hearing Tests for Children Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated April 26, 2024