PRICKLE1-related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → PRICKLE1-related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/prickle1-related-progressive-myoclonus-epilepsy-with-ataxia/ PRICKLE1-related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description PRICKLE1 -related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia is a rare inherited condition characterized by recurrent seizures (epilepsy) and problems with movement. The signs and symptoms of this disorder usually begin between the ages of 5 and 10. Problems with balance and coordination (ataxia) are usually the first symptoms of PRICKLE1 -related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia. Affected children often have trouble walking. Their gait is unbalanced and wide-based, and they may fall frequently. Later, children with this condition develop episodes of involuntary muscle jerking or twitching (myoclonus), which cause additional problems with movement. Myoclonus can also affect muscles in the face, leading to difficulty swallowing and slurred speech (dysarthria). Beginning later in childhood, some affected individuals develop tonic-clonic or grand mal seizures . These seizures involve a loss of consciousness, muscle rigidity, and convulsions. They often occur at night (nocturnally) while the person is sleeping. PRICKLE1 -related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia does not seem to affect intellectual ability. Although a few affected individuals have died in childhood, many have lived into adulthood. Frequency The prevalence of PRICKLE1 -related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia is unknown. The condition has been reported in three large families from Jordan and northern Israel and in at least two unrelated individuals. Causes PRICKLE1 -related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia is caused by mutations in the PRICKLE1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called prickle homolog 1, whose function is unknown. Studies suggest that it interacts with other proteins that are critical for brain development and function. Mutations in the PRICKLE1 gene alter the structure of prickle homolog 1 and disrupt its ability to interact with other proteins. However, it is unclear how these changes lead to movement problems, seizures, and the other features of PRICKLE1 -related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia. Learn more about the gene associated with PRICKLE1-related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia PRICKLE1 Inheritance Some cases of PRICKLE1 -related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other cases of PRICKLE1 -related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia are considered autosomal dominant because one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. These cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Other Names for This Condition EPM1B PME with ataxia PRICKLE1-related progressive myoclonic epilepsy with ataxia Progressive myoclonic epilepsy 1B Progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Epilepsy, progressive myoclonic, 1B Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM EPILEPSY, PROGRESSIVE MYOCLONIC, 1B; EPM1B Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bassuk AG, Wallace RH, Buhr A, Buller AR, Afawi Z, Shimojo M, Miyata S, Chen
S, Gonzalez-Alegre P, Griesbach HL, Wu S, Nashelsky M, Vladar EK, Antic D,
Ferguson PJ, Cirak S, Voit T, Scott MP, Axelrod JD, Gurnett C, Daoud AS, Kivity
S, Neufeld MY, Mazarib A, Straussberg R, Walid S, Korczyn AD, Slusarski DC,
Berkovic SF, El-Shanti HI. A homozygous mutation in human PRICKLE1 causes an
autosomal-recessive progressive myoclonus epilepsy-ataxia syndrome. Am J Hum
Genet. 2008 Nov;83(5):572-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.10.003. Epub 2008 Oct 30. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Berkovic SF, Mazarib A, Walid S, Neufeld MY, Manelis J, Nevo Y, Korczyn AD,
Yin J, Xiong L, Pandolfo M, Mulley JC, Wallace RH. A new clinical and molecular
form of Unverricht-Lundborg disease localized by homozygosity mapping. Brain.
2005 Mar;128(Pt 3):652-8. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh377. Epub 2005 Jan 5. Citation on PubMed El-Shanti H, Daoud A, Sadoon AA, Leal SM, Chen S, Lee K, Spiegel R. A distinct
autosomal recessive ataxia maps to chromosome 12 in an inbred family from Jordan.
Brain Dev. 2006 Jul;28(6):353-7. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2005.11.003. Epub 2006
Jan 10. Citation on PubMed Mastrangelo M, Caputi C, Esposito D, Leuzzi V. PRICKLE1-Related
Disorders. 2009 Sep 8 [updated 2022 Apr 21]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM,
Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK9674/ Citation on PubMed Straussberg R, Basel-Vanagaite L, Kivity S, Dabby R, Cirak S, Nurnberg P, Voit
T, Mahajnah M, Inbar D, Saifi GM, Lupski JR, Delague V, Megarbane A, Richter A,
Leshinsky E, Berkovic SF. An autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia syndrome with
upward gaze palsy, neuropathy, and seizures. Neurology. 2005 Jan 11;64(1):142-4.
doi: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000148600.60470.E6. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Epilepsy Genetic Disorders Movement Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 1, 2011