T-cell immunodeficiency, congenital alopecia, and nail dystrophy: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → T-cell immunodeficiency, congenital alopecia, and nail dystrophy URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/t-cell-immunodeficiency-congenital-alopecia-and-nail-dystrophy/ T-cell immunodeficiency, congenital alopecia, and nail dystrophy To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description T-cell immunodeficiency, congenital alopecia, and nail dystrophy is a type of severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID), which is a group of disorders characterized by an almost total lack of immune protection from foreign invaders such as bacteria and viruses. People with this form of SCID are missing functional immune cells called T cells , which normally recognize and attack foreign invaders to prevent infection. Without functional T cells, affected individuals develop repeated and persistent infections starting early in life. The infections result in slow growth and can be life-threatening; without effective treatment, most affected individuals live only into infancy or early childhood. T-cell immunodeficiency, congenital alopecia, and nail dystrophy  also affects growth of the hair and nails. Congenital alopecia refers to an absence of hair that is apparent from birth. Affected individuals have no scalp hair, eyebrows, or eyelashes. Nail dystrophy is a general term that describes malformed fingernails and toenails; in this condition, the nails are often ridged , pitted , or abnormally curved. Researchers have described abnormalities of the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system) in at least two cases of this condition. However, it is not yet known whether central nervous system abnormalities are a common feature of T-cell immunodeficiency, congenital alopecia, and nail dystrophy. Frequency T-cell immunodeficiency, congenital alopecia, and nail dystrophy is a rare disorder. It has been diagnosed in only a few individuals, almost all of whom are members of a large extended family from a community in southern Italy. Causes T-cell immunodeficiency, congenital alopecia, and nail dystrophy results from mutations in the FOXN1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is important for development of the skin, hair, nails, and immune system. Studies suggest that this protein helps guide the formation of hair follicles and the growth of fingernails and toenails. The FOXN1 protein also plays a critical role in the formation of the thymus , which is a gland located behind the breastbone where T cells mature and become functional. Researchers suspect that the FOXN1 protein is also involved in the development of the central nervous system, although its role is unclear. Mutations in the FOXN1 gene prevent cells from making any functional FOXN1 protein. Without this protein, hair and nails cannot grow normally. A lack of FOXN1 protein also prevents the formation of the thymus. When this gland is not present, the immune system cannot produce mature, functional T cells to fight infections. As a result, people with T-cell immunodeficiency, congenital alopecia, and nail dystrophy develop recurrent serious infections starting early in life. Learn more about the gene associated with T-cell immunodeficiency, congenital alopecia, and nail dystrophy FOXN1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. However, some people who carry one copy of a mutated FOXN1 gene have abnormal fingernails or toenails. Other Names for This Condition Alymphoid cystic thymic dysgenesis Congenital alopecia and nail dystrophy associated with severe functional T-cell immunodeficiency Pignata Guarino syndrome Winged helix deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: T-cell immunodeficiency, congenital alopecia, and nail dystrophy Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Severe combined immunodeficiency due to FOXN1 deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM T-CELL IMMUNODEFICIENCY, CONGENITAL ALOPECIA, AND NAIL DYSTROPHY; TIDAND Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Adriani M, Martinez-Mir A, Fusco F, Busiello R, Frank J, Telese S, Matrecano
E, Ursini MV, Christiano AM, Pignata C. Ancestral founder mutation of the nude
(FOXN1) gene in congenital severe combined immunodeficiency associated with
alopecia in southern Italy population. Ann Hum Genet. 2004 May;68(Pt 3):265-8.
doi: 10.1046/j.1529-8817.2004.00091.x. Citation on PubMed Amorosi S, D'Armiento M, Calcagno G, Russo I, Adriani M, Christiano AM, Weiner
L, Brissette JL, Pignata C. FOXN1 homozygous mutation associated with anencephaly
and severe neural tube defect in human athymic Nude/SCID fetus. Clin Genet. 2008
Apr;73(4):380-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2008.00977.x. Citation on PubMed Amorosi S, Vigliano I, Del Giudice E, Panico L, Maruotti GM, Fusco A,
Quarantelli M, Ciccone C, Ursini MV, Martinelli P, Pignata C. Brain alteration in
a Nude/SCID fetus carrying FOXN1 homozygous mutation. J Neurol Sci. 2010 Nov
15;298(1-2):121-3. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2010.08.066. Citation on PubMed Frank J, Pignata C, Panteleyev AA, Prowse DM, Baden H, Weiner L, Gaetaniello
L, Ahmad W, Pozzi N, Cserhalmi-Friedman PB, Aita VM, Uyttendaele H, Gordon D, Ott
J, Brissette JL, Christiano AM. Exposing the human nude phenotype. Nature. 1999
Apr 8;398(6727):473-4. doi: 10.1038/18997. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Pignata C, Fiore M, Guzzetta V, Castaldo A, Sebastio G, Porta F, Guarino A.
Congenital Alopecia and nail dystrophy associated with severe functional T-cell
immunodeficiency in two sibs. Am J Med Genet. 1996 Oct 16;65(2):167-70. doi:
10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19961016)65:23.0.CO;2-O. Citation on PubMed Pignata C, Fusco A, Amorosi S. Human clinical phenotype associated with FOXN1
mutations. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2009;665:195-206. Citation on PubMed Pignata C. A lesson for unraveling complex aspects of novel immunodeficiencies
from the human equivalent of the nude/SCID phenotype. J Hematother Stem Cell Res.
2002 Apr;11(2):409-14. doi: 10.1089/152581602753658592. Citation on PubMed Vigliano I, Gorrese M, Fusco A, Vitiello L, Amorosi S, Panico L, Ursini MV,
Calcagno G, Racioppi L, Del Vecchio L, Pignata C. FOXN1 mutation abrogates
prenatal T-cell development in humans. J Med Genet. 2011 Jun;48(6):413-6. doi:
10.1136/jmg.2011.089532. Epub 2011 Apr 19. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Hair Loss Immune System and Disorders Nail Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Bone marrow transplant Genetics Immune response Immunodeficiency disorders Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2014