Craniofacial-deafness-hand syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Craniofacial-deafness-hand syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/craniofacial-deafness-hand-syndrome/ Craniofacial-deafness-hand syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Craniofacial-deafness-hand syndrome is characterized by distinctive facial features, profound hearing loss, and hand abnormalities. The distinctive facial features of people with craniofacial-deafness-hand syndrome result from a variety of developmental abnormalities involving the skull (cranium) and face. Affected individuals often have underdeveloped or absent nasal bones resulting in a small nose, thin nostrils, and a flattened mid-face with a flat nasal bridge . Individuals with this condition typically also have widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism ), narrowed openings of the eyes (narrowed palpebral fissures), a small upper jaw (hypoplastic maxilla),  and a small mouth with pursed lips. People with this condition also have profound hearing loss that is caused by abnormalities in the inner ear (sensorineural deafness).  Hearing loss in these individuals is present from birth. In affected individuals, a common abnormality of the muscles in the hand is a malformation in which all of the fingers are angled outward toward the fifth finger ( ulnar deviation ). People with craniofacial-deafness-hand syndrome may also have permanently bent third, fourth, and fifth fingers ( camptodactyly ), which can limit finger movement and lead to joint deformities called contractures. Contractures in the wrist can further impair hand movements. Frequency Craniofacial-deafness-hand syndrome is an extremely rare condition. Only a few cases have been reported in the scientific literature. Causes Craniofacial-deafness-hand syndrome is caused by mutations in the PAX3 gene. The PAX3 gene plays a critical role in the formation of tissues and organs during embryonic development. To perform this function, the gene provides instructions for making a protein that attaches (binds) to specific areas of DNA to help control the activity of particular genes. During embryonic development, the PAX3 gene is active in cells called neural crest cells. These cells migrate from the developing spinal cord to specific regions in the embryo. The protein produced from the PAX3 gene directs the activity of other genes that signal neural crest cells to form specialized tissues or cell types. These include some nerve tissues, bones in the face and skull (craniofacial bones), and muscle tissue. At least one PAX3 gene mutation has been identified in individuals with craniofacial-deafness-hand syndrome. This mutation appears to affect the ability of the PAX3 protein to bind to DNA. As a result, the PAX3 protein cannot control the activity of other genes and cannot regulate the differentiation of neural crest cells. A lack of specialization of neural crest cells leads to the impaired growth of craniofacial bones, nerve tissue, and muscles seen in craniofacial-deafness-hand syndrome. Learn more about the gene associated with Craniofacial-deafness-hand syndrome PAX3 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition CDHS Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Craniofacial-deafness-hand syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Craniofacial-deafness-hand syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CRANIOFACIAL-DEAFNESS-HAND SYNDROME; CDHS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Asher JH Jr, Sommer A, Morell R, Friedman TB. Missense mutation in the paired
domain of PAX3 causes craniofacial-deafness-hand syndrome. Hum Mutat.
1996;7(1):30-5. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1996)7:13.0.CO;2-T. Citation on PubMed Birrane G, Soni A, Ladias JA. Structural basis for DNA recognition by the
human PAX3 homeodomain. Biochemistry. 2009 Feb 17;48(6):1148-55. doi:
10.1021/bi802052y. Citation on PubMed Sommer A, Bartholomew DW. Craniofacial-deafness-hand syndrome revisited. Am J
Med Genet A. 2003 Nov 15;123A(1):91-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20501. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Craniofacial Abnormalities Genetic Disorders Hand Injuries and Disorders Hearing Disorders and Deafness MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Contracture deformity Genetics Sensorineural deafness Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2012