Nonsyndromic aplasia cutis congenita: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Nonsyndromic aplasia cutis congenita URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/nonsyndromic-aplasia-cutis-congenita/ Nonsyndromic aplasia cutis congenita To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Nonsyndromic aplasia cutis congenita is a condition in which babies are born with localized areas of missing skin (lesions). These areas resemble ulcers or open wounds, although they are sometimes already healed at birth. Lesions most commonly occur on the top of the head (skull vertex), although they can be found on the torso or limbs. In some cases, the bone and other tissues under the skin defect are also underdeveloped. Most affected babies have a single lesion. The lesions vary in size and can be differently shaped: some are round or oval, others rectangular, and still others star-shaped. They usually leave a scar after they heal. When the scalp is involved, there may be an absence of hair growth (alopecia) in the affected area. When the underlying bone and other tissues are involved, affected individuals are at higher risk of infections. If these severe defects occur on the head, the membrane that covers the brain (the dura mater) may be exposed, and life-threatening bleeding may occur from nearby vessels. Skin lesions are typically the only feature of nonsyndromic aplasia cutis congenita, although other skin problems and abnormalities of the bones and other tissues occur rarely. However, the characteristic skin lesions can occur as one of many symptoms in other conditions, including Johanson-Blizzard syndrome and Adams-Oliver syndrome . These instances are described as syndromic aplasia cutis congenita. Frequency Aplasia cutis congenita affects approximately 1 in 10,000 newborns. The incidence of the nonsyndromic form is unknown. Causes Nonsyndromic aplasia cutis congenita can have different causes, and often the cause is unknown. Because the condition is sometimes found in multiple members of a family, it is thought to have a genetic component; however, the genetic factors are not fully understood. Researchers suggest that genes important for skin growth may be involved. It is thought that impairments of skin growth more commonly affect the skin at the top of the head because that region needs to be able to grow quickly to cover the fast-growing skull of a developing baby. In some cases, nonsyndromic aplasia cutis congenita is caused by exposure to a drug called methimazole before birth. This medication is given to treat an overactive thyroid gland . Babies whose mothers take this medication during pregnancy are at increased risk of having the condition. In addition, certain viral infections in a pregnant mother can cause the baby to be born with the skin lesions characteristic of nonsyndromic aplasia cutis congenita. Other cases are thought to be caused by injury to the baby during development. Inheritance Most cases of nonsyndromic aplasia cutis congenita are sporadic, which means they occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. When the condition runs in families, inheritance usually follows an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of an altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Rarely, the condition appears to follow an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance, which means both copies of a gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition ACC Congenital absence of skin on scalp Congenital defect of the skull and scalp Congenital ulcer of the newborn Scalp defect congenital Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Aplasia cutis congenita Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Aplasia cutis congenita Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM APLASIA CUTIS CONGENITA, NONSYNDROMIC; ACC Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Abulezz TA, Shalkamy MA. Aplasia cutis congenita: Two cases of non-scalp
lesions. Indian J Plast Surg. 2009 Jul;42(2):261-4. doi: 10.1055/s-0039-1699359. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Akar M, Dilli D, Sandal G, Erdeve O, Dilmen U. Aplasia cutis congenita due to
methimazol exposure within the first trimester of pregnancy: case report. J
Perinat Med. 2011 Nov;39(6):743-4. doi: 10.1515/jpm.2011.089. Epub 2011 Aug 2. No
abstract available. Citation on PubMed Frieden IJ. Aplasia cutis congenita: a clinical review and proposal for
classification. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1986 Apr;14(4):646-60. doi:
10.1016/s0190-9622(86)70082-0. Citation on PubMed Maillet-Declerck M, Vinchon M, Guerreschi P, Pasquesoone L, Dhellemmes P,
Duquennoy-Martinot V, Pellerin P. Aplasia cutis congenita: review of 29 cases and
proposal of a therapeutic strategy. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2013 Apr;23(2):89-93.
doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1322539. Epub 2012 Aug 17. Citation on PubMed Mihci E, Erisir S, Tacoy S, Luleci G, Alpsoy E, Oygur N. Aplasia cutis
congenita: three cases with three different underlying etiologies. Turk J
Pediatr. 2009 Sep-Oct;51(5):510-4. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Skin Conditions MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2013