CATSPER1-related nonsyndromic male infertility: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → CATSPER1-related nonsyndromic male infertility URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/catsper1-related-nonsyndromic-male-infertility/ CATSPER1-related nonsyndromic male infertility To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description CATSPER1 -related nonsyndromic male infertility is a condition that affects the function of sperm, leading to difficulty conceiving children (a condition called infertility). People with this condition produce sperm that have decreased movement (motility). Affected individuals may also produce fewer sperm cells or sperm cells that are abnormally shaped. These sperm abnormalities prevent people with this condition from conceiving without assisted reproductive technologies. Frequency The prevalence of CATSPER1 -related nonsyndromic male infertility is unknown. Causes Variants (also called mutations) in the CATSPER1 gene cause CATSPER1 -related nonsyndromic male infertility. The CATSPER1 gene provides instructions for producing a protein that is found in the tail of sperm cells. The CATSPER1 protein is involved in the movement of the sperm tail, which propels the sperm forward and is required for sperm cells to push through the outside membrane of the egg cell during fertilization. CATSPER1 gene variants cause sperm cells to produce altered versions of the CATSPER1 protein that are not functional or that can be quickly broken down (degraded) by the cell. Sperm cells that are missing a functional CATSPER1 protein have decreased motion in their tails and move more slowly than normal. These sperm cells  cannot push through the outside membrane of the egg cell. As a result, the sperm cells cannot reach the inside of the egg cell to achieve fertilization. Learn more about the gene associated with CATSPER1-related nonsyndromic male infertility CATSPER1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell must have a variant to cause the disorder. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Males (with one Y chromosome) who have two CATSPER1 gene variants in each cell have CATSPER1 -related nonsyndromic male infertility. Females (with two X chromosomes) who have two CATSPER1 gene variants in each cell have no symptoms because they do not produce sperm and the changes only affect sperm function. Other Names for This Condition CATSPER-related nonsyndromic male infertility CATSPER1-related male infertility Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Spermatogenic failure 7 Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM SPERMATOGENIC FAILURE 7; SPGF7 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Avenarius MR, Hildebrand MS, Zhang Y, Meyer NC, Smith LL, Kahrizi K, Najmabadi
H, Smith RJ. Human male infertility caused by mutations in the CATSPER1 channel
protein. Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Apr;84(4):505-10. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.03.004.
Epub 2009 Apr 2. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Hildebrand MS, Avenarius MR, Smith RJH. CATSPER-Related Male
Infertility - RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY. 2009 Dec 3 [updated
2017 Mar 23]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A,
editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of
Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK22925/ Citation on PubMed Jalalabadi FN, Cheraghi E, Janatifar R, Momeni HR. The Detection of CatSper1
and CatSper3 Expression in Men with Normozoospermia and Asthenoteratozoospermia
and Its Association with Sperm Parameters, Fertilization Rate, Embryo Quality.
Reprod Sci. 2024 Mar;31(3):704-713. doi: 10.1007/s43032-023-01397-4. Epub 2023
Nov 13. Citation on PubMed Li HG, Liao AH, Ding XF, Zhou H, Xiong CL. The expression and significance of
CATSPER1 in human testis and ejaculated spermatozoa. Asian J Androl. 2006
May;8(3):301-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1745-7262.2006.00132.x. Citation on PubMed Singh AP, Rajender S. CatSper channel, sperm function and male fertility.
Reprod Biomed Online. 2015 Jan;30(1):28-38. doi: 10.1016/j.rbmo.2014.09.014. Epub
2014 Oct 8. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Assisted Reproductive Technology Genetic Disorders Male Infertility MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Semen analysis Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated April 30, 2024