Congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/congenital-sucrase-isomaltase-deficiency/ Congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency is a rare genetic disorder that affects an individual's ability to digest certain sugars. People with this condition cannot break down the sugars sucrose and maltose. Sucrose (a sugar found in fruits, and also known as table sugar) and maltose (the sugar found in grains) are called disaccharides because they are made of two simple sugars.  Disaccharides are broken down into simple sugars during digestion. Sucrose is broken down into glucose and another simple sugar called fructose, and maltose is broken down into two glucose molecules. People with congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency cannot break down the sugars sucrose and maltose, and other compounds made from these sugar molecules (carbohydrates). Congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency usually becomes apparent after an infant is weaned and starts to consume fruits, juices, grains, and other starchy food. After ingestion of sucrose or maltose, an affected individual will typically experience stomach cramps, bloating, excess gas production, and diarrhea. These digestive problems can lead to failure to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive) and malnutrition. Frequency The prevalence of congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency is estimated to be 1 in 5,000 people of European descent.  This condition is much more prevalent in the native populations of Greenland, Alaska, and Canada, where as many as 1 in 20 people may be affected. Causes Variants (also known as mutations) in the SI gene cause congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency. The SI gene provides instructions for producing the enzyme sucrase-isomaltase. This enzyme is found in the small intestine and is responsible for breaking down sucrose and maltose into their simple sugar components. These simple sugars are then absorbed by the small intestine. Variants that cause this condition alter the structure, disrupt the production, or impair the function of sucrase-isomaltase. These changes prevent the enzyme from breaking down sucrose and maltose. Rather than being absorbed by the small intestine, the undigested sugars move to the large intestine (colon). Here, they attract water and are consumed by normal bacteria in the colon, causing  the intestinal discomfort seen in individuals with congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency. Learn more about the gene associated with Congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency SI Inheritance Congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have variants. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they may not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Congenital sucrose intolerance Congenital sucrose-isomaltose malabsorption CSID Disaccharide intolerance I SI deficiency Sucrase-isomaltase deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Sucrase-isomaltase deficiency Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM SUCRASE-ISOMALTASE DEFICIENCY, CONGENITAL; CSID Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Belmont JW, Reid B, Taylor W, Baker SS, Moore WH, Morriss MC, Podrebarac SM,
Glass N, Schwartz ID. Congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency presenting with
failure to thrive, hypercalcemia, and nephrocalcinosis. BMC Pediatr. 2002 Apr
25;2:4. doi: 10.1186/1471-2431-2-4. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Husein DM, Wanes D, Marten LM, Zimmer KP, Naim HY. Heterozygotes Are a
Potential New Entity among Homozygotes and Compound Heterozygotes in Congenital
Sucrase-Isomaltase Deficiency. Nutrients. 2019 Sep 25;11(10):2290. doi:
10.3390/nu11102290. Citation on PubMed Jacob R, Zimmer KP, Schmitz J, Naim HY. Congenital sucrase-isomaltase
deficiency arising from cleavage and secretion of a mutant form of the enzyme. J
Clin Invest. 2000 Jul;106(2):281-7. doi: 10.1172/JCI9677. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Keiser M, Alfalah M, Propsting MJ, Castelletti D, Naim HY. Altered folding,
turnover, and polarized sorting act in concert to define a novel pathomechanism
of congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency. J Biol Chem. 2006 May
19;281(20):14393-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M513631200. Epub 2006 Mar 16. Citation on PubMed Naim HY, Roth J, Sterchi EE, Lentze M, Milla P, Schmitz J, Hauri HP.
Sucrase-isomaltase deficiency in humans. Different mutations disrupt
intracellular transport, processing, and function of an intestinal brush border
enzyme. J Clin Invest. 1988 Aug;82(2):667-79. doi: 10.1172/JCI113646. Citation on PubMed Ouwendijk J, Moolenaar CE, Peters WJ, Hollenberg CP, Ginsel LA, Fransen JA,
Naim HY. Congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency. Identification of a glutamine
to proline substitution that leads to a transport block of sucrase-isomaltase in
a pre-Golgi compartment. J Clin Invest. 1996 Feb 1;97(3):633-41. doi:
10.1172/JCI118459. Citation on PubMed Ritz V, Alfalah M, Zimmer KP, Schmitz J, Jacob R, Naim HY. Congenital
sucrase-isomaltase deficiency because of an accumulation of the mutant enzyme in
the endoplasmic reticulum. Gastroenterology. 2003 Dec;125(6):1678-85. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2003.09.022. Citation on PubMed Sander P, Alfalah M, Keiser M, Korponay-Szabo I, Kovacs JB, Leeb T, Naim HY.
Novel mutations in the human sucrase-isomaltase gene (SI) that cause congenital
carbohydrate malabsorption. Hum Mutat. 2006 Jan;27(1):119. doi:
10.1002/humu.9392. Citation on PubMed Sibley E. Carbohydrate intolerance. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2004
Mar;20(2):162-7. doi: 10.1097/00001574-200403000-00019. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Diarrhea Genetic Disorders Malabsorption Syndromes MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Abdominal bloating Genetics Inborn errors of metabolism Malabsorption Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 14, 2023