Jackson-Weiss syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Jackson-Weiss syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/jackson-weiss-syndrome/ Jackson-Weiss syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Jackson-Weiss syndrome is a genetic disorder characterized by foot abnormalities and the premature fusion of certain skull bones (craniosynostosis). This early fusion prevents the skull from growing normally and affects the shape of the head and face. Many of the characteristic facial features of Jackson-Weiss syndrome result from premature fusion of the skull bones. Abnormal growth of these bones leads to a misshapen skull, widely spaced eyes , and a bulging forehead . Foot abnormalities are the most consistent features of Jackson-Weiss syndrome. The first (big) toes are short and wide, and they bend away from the other toes. Additionally, the bones of some toes may be fused together (syndactyly) or abnormally shaped. The hands are almost always normal. Some individuals with Jackson-Weiss syndrome have hearing impairment. People with Jackson-Weiss syndrome usually have normal intelligence and a normal life span. Frequency Jackson-Weiss syndrome is a rare genetic disorder; its incidence is unknown. Causes Mutations in the FGFR2 gene cause Jackson-Weiss syndrome. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called fibroblast growth factor receptor 2. Among its multiple functions, this protein signals immature cells to become bone cells during embryonic development. A mutation in a specific part of the FGFR2 gene overstimulates signaling by the FGFR2 protein, which promotes the premature fusion of skull bones and affects the development of bones in the feet. Learn more about the gene associated with Jackson-Weiss syndrome FGFR2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition JWS Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Jackson-Weiss syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Jackson-Weiss syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM JACKSON-WEISS SYNDROME; JWS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Agochukwu NB, Solomon BD, Muenke M. Hearing loss in syndromic
craniosynostoses: otologic manifestations and clinical findings. Int J Pediatr
Otorhinolaryngol. 2014 Dec;78(12):2037-47. doi: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2014.09.019.
Epub 2014 Sep 28. Citation on PubMed Chen L, Deng CX. Roles of FGF signaling in skeletal development and human
genetic diseases. Front Biosci. 2005 May 1;10:1961-76. doi: 10.2741/1671. Citation on PubMed Cohen MM Jr. Jackson-Weiss syndrome. Am J Med Genet. 2001 May 15;100(4):325-9.
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1271. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Heike C, Seto M, Hing A, Palidin A, Hu FZ, Preston RA, Ehrlich GD, Cunningham
M. Century of Jackson-Weiss syndrome: further definition of clinical and
radiographic findings in "lost" descendants of the original kindred. Am J Med
Genet. 2001 May 15;100(4):315-24. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1266. Citation on PubMed Jabs EW, Li X, Scott AF, Meyers G, Chen W, Eccles M, Mao JI, Charnas LR,
Jackson CE, Jaye M. Jackson-Weiss and Crouzon syndromes are allelic with
mutations in fibroblast growth factor receptor 2. Nat Genet. 1994 Nov;8(3):275-9.
doi: 10.1038/ng1194-275. Erratum In: Nat Genet 1995 Apr;9(4):451. Citation on PubMed Wenger T, Miller D, Evans K. FGFR Craniosynostosis Syndromes
Overview. 1998 Oct 20 [updated 2020 Apr 30]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM,
Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1455/ Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Craniofacial Abnormalities Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Craniosynostosis Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated January 1, 2017