Peeling skin syndrome 2: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Peeling skin syndrome 2 URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/peeling-skin-syndrome-2/ Peeling skin syndrome 2 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Peeling skin syndrome 2 is a skin disorder characterized by painless peeling of the top layer of skin. In this form of peeling skin syndrome, the peeling is most apparent on the hands and feet. Occasionally, peeling also occurs on the arms and legs. The peeling usually starts soon after  birth, although the condition can also begin in childhood or later in life. Skin peeling is made worse by exposure to heat, humidity and other forms of moisture, and friction. The underlying skin may be temporarily red and itchy, but it typically heals without scarring. Peeling skin syndrome 2 is not associated with any other health problems. Frequency Peeling skin syndrome 2 is a rare condition, with a few dozen cases reported in the medical literature. However, because its signs and symptoms tend to be mild and similar to those of other skin disorders, the condition is likely underdiagnosed. Causes Peeling skin syndrome 2 is caused by variants (also called mutations) in the TGM5 gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called transglutaminase 5, which is part of the outer layer of skin (the epidermis). Transglutaminase 5 plays a critical role in the formation of a structure called the cornified cell envelope, which surrounds epidermal cells and helps the skin form a protective barrier between the body and its environment. TGM5 gene variants reduce the activity of transglutaminase 5 or prevent cells from making any of this enzyme. A shortage of transglutaminase 5 weakens the cornified cell envelope, which allows the outermost cells of the epidermis to separate easily from the underlying skin and peel off. The peeling may be most noticeable on the hands and feet because those areas are more often exposed to moisture and friction. Learn more about the gene associated with Peeling skin syndrome 2 TGM5 Inheritance Peeling skin syndrome 2 is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell must have a variant to cause the disorder. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Acral peeling skin syndrome APSS Peeling skin syndrome, acral type Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Acral peeling skin syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Acral peeling skin syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PEELING SKIN SYNDROME 2; PSS2 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Cassidy AJ, van Steensel MA, Steijlen PM, van Geel M, van der Velden J, Morley
SM, Terrinoni A, Melino G, Candi E, McLean WH. A homozygous missense mutation in
TGM5 abolishes epidermal transglutaminase 5 activity and causes acral peeling
skin syndrome. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Dec;77(6):909-17. doi: 10.1086/497707. Epub
2005 Oct 11. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Kiritsi D, Cosgarea I, Franzke CW, Schumann H, Oji V, Kohlhase J,
Bruckner-Tuderman L, Has C. Acral peeling skin syndrome with TGM5 gene mutations
may resemble epidermolysis bullosa simplex in young individuals. J Invest
Dermatol. 2010 Jun;130(6):1741-6. doi: 10.1038/jid.2010.23. Epub 2010 Feb 18. No
abstract available. Citation on PubMed Pavlovic S, Krunic AL, Bulj TK, Medenica MM, Fong K, Arita K, McGrath JA.
Acral peeling skin syndrome: a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorder.
Pediatr Dermatol. 2012 May-Jun;29(3):258-63. doi:
10.1111/j.1525-1470.2011.01563.x. Epub 2011 Nov 8. Citation on PubMed Pigors M, Kiritsi D, Cobzaru C, Schwieger-Briel A, Suarez J, Faletra F, Aho H,
Makela L, Kern JS, Bruckner-Tuderman L, Has C. TGM5 mutations impact epidermal
differentiation in acral peeling skin syndrome. J Invest Dermatol. 2012
Oct;132(10):2422-2429. doi: 10.1038/jid.2012.166. Epub 2012 May 24. Citation on PubMed Szczecinska W, Nesteruk D, Wertheim-Tysarowska K, Greenblatt DT, Baty D,
Browne F, Liu L, Ozoemena L, Terron-Kwiatkowski A, McGrath JA, Mellerio JE,
Morton J, Wozniak K, Kowalewski C, Has C, Moss C. Under-recognition of acral
peeling skin syndrome: 59 new cases with 15 novel mutations. Br J Dermatol. 2014
Nov;171(5):1206-10. doi: 10.1111/bjd.12964. Epub 2014 Oct 20. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Skin Conditions MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated September 5, 2023