Wagner syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Wagner syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/wagner-syndrome/ Wagner syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Wagner syndrome is a hereditary disorder that causes progressive vision loss. The eye problems that lead to vision loss typically begin in childhood, although the vision impairment might not be immediately apparent. In people with Wagner syndrome, the light-sensitive tissue that lines the back of the eye ( the retina ) becomes thin and may separate from the back of the eye ( retinal detachment ). The blood vessels within the retina (known as the choroid) may also be abnormal. The retina and the choroid progressively break down (degenerate). Some people with Wagner syndrome have blurred vision because of ectopic fovea, an abnormality in which the part of the retina responsible for sharp central vision is out of place. Additionally, the thick, clear gel that fills the eyeball (the vitreous) becomes watery and thin. People with Wagner syndrome develop a clouding of the lens of the eye ( cataract ). Affected individuals may also experience nearsightedness ( myopia ), progressive night blindness, or a narrowing of their field of vision. Vision impairment in people with Wagner syndrome can vary from near normal vision to complete loss of vision in both eyes. Frequency Wagner syndrome is a rare disorder, although its exact prevalence is unknown.  Approximately 300 affected individuals have been described worldwide; about half of these individuals are from the Netherlands. Causes Mutations in the VCAN gene cause Wagner syndrome.  The VCAN gene provides instructions for making a protein called versican. Versican is found in the extracellular matrix, which is the intricate lattice of proteins and other molecules that forms in the spaces between cells. Versican interacts with many of these proteins and molecules to facilitate the assembly of the extracellular matrix and ensure its stability. Within the eye , versican interacts with other proteins to maintain the structure and gel-like consistency of the vitreous. VCAN gene mutations that cause Wagner syndrome lead to insufficient levels of versican in the vitreous. Without enough versican to interact with the many proteins of the vitreous, the structure becomes unstable. This lack of stability in the vitreous affects other areas of the eye and contributes to the vision problems that occur in people with Wagner syndrome. It is unknown why VCAN gene mutations seem solely to affect vision. Learn more about the gene associated with Wagner syndrome VCAN Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition Hyaloideoretinal degeneration of Wagner VCAN-related vitreoretinopathy Wagner disease Wagner vitreoretinal degeneration Wagner vitreoretinopathy Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Wagner syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Wagner disease Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM WAGNER VITREORETINOPATHY; WGVRP Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Kloeckener-Gruissem B, Amstutz C. VCAN-Related Vitreoretinopathy -
RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY. 2009 Feb 3 [updated 2016 Jan 7].
In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington,
Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK3821/ Citation on PubMed Kloeckener-Gruissem B, Bartholdi D, Abdou MT, Zimmermann DR, Berger W.
Identification of the genetic defect in the original Wagner syndrome family. Mol
Vis. 2006 Apr 17;12:350-5. Citation on PubMed Meredith SP, Richards AJ, Flanagan DW, Scott JD, Poulson AV, Snead MP.
Clinical characterisation and molecular analysis of Wagner syndrome. Br J
Ophthalmol. 2007 May;91(5):655-9. doi: 10.1136/bjo.2006.104406. Epub 2006 Oct 11. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Miyamoto T, Inoue H, Sakamoto Y, Kudo E, Naito T, Mikawa T, Mikawa Y, Isashiki
Y, Osabe D, Shinohara S, Shiota H, Itakura M. Identification of a novel splice
site mutation of the CSPG2 gene in a Japanese family with Wagner syndrome. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2005 Aug;46(8):2726-35. doi: 10.1167/iovs.05-0057. Citation on PubMed Mukhopadhyay A, Nikopoulos K, Maugeri A, de Brouwer AP, van Nouhuys CE, Boon
CJ, Perveen R, Zegers HA, Wittebol-Post D, van den Biesen PR, van der
Velde-Visser SD, Brunner HG, Black GC, Hoyng CB, Cremers FP. Erosive
vitreoretinopathy and wagner disease are caused by intronic mutations in
CSPG2/Versican that result in an imbalance of splice variants. Invest Ophthalmol
Vis Sci. 2006 Aug;47(8):3565-72. doi: 10.1167/iovs.06-0141. Citation on PubMed Ronan SM, Tran-Viet KN, Burner EL, Metlapally R, Toth CA, Young TL. Mutational
hot spot potential of a novel base pair mutation of the CSPG2 gene in a family
with Wagner syndrome. Arch Ophthalmol. 2009 Nov;127(11):1511-9. doi:
10.1001/archophthalmol.2009.273. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Cataract Genetic Disorders Retinal Disorders Vision Impairment and Blindness MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated July 1, 2014