Desmoid tumor: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Desmoid tumor URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/desmoid-tumor/ Desmoid tumor To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description A desmoid tumor is an abnormal growth that arises from connective tissue , which is the tissue that provides strength and flexibility to structures such as bones, ligaments, and muscles. Typically, a single tumor develops, although some people have multiple tumors. The tumors can occur anywhere in the body. Tumors that form in the abdominal wall are called abdominal desmoid tumors; those that arise from the tissue that connects the abdominal organs are called intra-abdominal desmoid tumors; and tumors found in other regions of the body are called extra-abdominal desmoid tumors. Extra-abdominal tumors occur most often in the shoulders, upper arms, and upper legs. Desmoid tumors are fibrous, much like scar tissue. They are generally not considered cancerous (malignant) because they do not spread to other parts of the body ( metastasize ); however, they can aggressively invade the surrounding tissue and can be very difficult to remove surgically. These tumors often recur, even after apparently complete removal. The most common symptom of desmoid tumors is pain. Other signs and symptoms, which are often caused by growth of the tumor into surrounding tissue, vary based on the size and location of the tumor. Intra-abdominal desmoid tumors can block the bowel, causing constipation. Extra-abdominal desmoid tumors can restrict the movement of affected joints and cause limping or difficulty moving the arms or legs. Desmoid tumors occur frequently in people with an inherited form of colon cancer called familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). These individuals typically develop intra-abdominal desmoid tumors in addition to abnormal growths (called polyps) and cancerous tumors in the colon . Desmoid tumors that are not part of an inherited condition are described as sporadic. Frequency Desmoid tumors are rare, affecting an estimated 1 to 2 per 500,000 people worldwide. In the United States, 900 to 1,500 new cases are diagnosed per year. Sporadic desmoid tumors are more common than those associated with familial adenomatous polyposis. Causes Mutations in the CTNNB1 gene or the APC gene cause desmoid tumors. CTNNB1 gene mutations account for around 85 percent of sporadic desmoid tumors. APC gene mutations cause desmoid tumors associated with familial adenomatous polyposis as well as 10 to 15 percent of sporadic desmoid tumors. Both genes are involved in an important cell signaling pathway that controls the growth and division (proliferation) of cells and the process by which cells mature to carry out specific functions (differentiation). The CTNNB1 gene provides instructions for making a protein called beta-catenin. As part of the cell-signaling pathway, beta-catenin interacts with other proteins to control the activity (expression) of particular genes, which helps promote cell proliferation and differentiation. CTNNB1 gene mutations lead to an abnormally stable beta-catenin protein that is not broken down when it is no longer needed. The protein accumulates in cells, where it continues to function in an uncontrolled way. The protein produced from the APC gene helps regulate levels of beta-catenin in the cell. When beta-catenin is no longer needed, the APC protein attaches (binds) to it, which signals for it to be broken down. Mutations in the APC gene that cause desmoid tumors lead to a short APC protein that is unable to interact with beta-catenin. As a result, beta-catenin is not broken down and, instead, accumulates in cells. Excess beta-catenin, whether caused by CTNNB1 or APC gene mutations, promotes uncontrolled growth and division of cells, allowing the formation of desmoid tumors. Learn more about the genes associated with Desmoid tumor APC CTNNB1 Inheritance Most desmoid tumors are sporadic and are not inherited. Sporadic tumors result from gene mutations that occur during a person's lifetime, called somatic mutations. A somatic mutation in one copy of the gene is sufficient to cause the disorder. Somatic mutations in either the CTNNB1 or the APC gene can cause sporadic desmoid tumors. An inherited mutation in one copy of the APC gene causes familial adenomatous polyposis and predisposes affected individuals to develop desmoid tumors. The desmoid tumors occur when a somatic mutation occurs in the second copy of the APC gene. In these cases, the condition is sometimes called hereditary desmoid disease. Other Names for This Condition Aggressive fibromatosis Deep fibromatosis Desmoid fibromatosis Familial infiltrative fibromatosis Hereditary desmoid disease Musculoaponeurotic fibromatosis Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Desmoid disease, hereditary Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Desmoid tumor Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM DESMOID DISEASE, HEREDITARY; DESMD Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Alman BA, Li C, Pajerski ME, Diaz-Cano S, Wolfe HJ. Increased beta-catenin
protein and somatic APC mutations in sporadic aggressive fibromatoses (desmoid
tumors). Am J Pathol. 1997 Aug;151(2):329-34. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Escobar C, Munker R, Thomas JO, Li BD, Burton GV. Update on desmoid tumors.
Ann Oncol. 2012 Mar;23(3):562-569. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdr386. Epub 2011 Aug 22. Citation on PubMed Huss S, Nehles J, Binot E, Wardelmann E, Mittler J, Kleine MA, Kunstlinger H,
Hartmann W, Hohenberger P, Merkelbach-Bruse S, Buettner R, Schildhaus HU.
beta-catenin (CTNNB1) mutations and clinicopathological features of mesenteric
desmoid-type fibromatosis. Histopathology. 2013 Jan;62(2):294-304. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2559.2012.04355.x. Epub 2012 Sep 28. Citation on PubMed Kotiligam D, Lazar AJ, Pollock RE, Lev D. Desmoid tumor: a disease opportune
for molecular insights. Histol Histopathol. 2008 Jan;23(1):117-26. doi:
10.14670/HH-23.117. Citation on PubMed Lips DJ, Barker N, Clevers H, Hennipman A. The role of APC and beta-catenin in
the aetiology of aggressive fibromatosis (desmoid tumors). Eur J Surg Oncol. 2009
Jan;35(1):3-10. doi: 10.1016/j.ejso.2008.07.003. Epub 2008 Aug 21. Citation on PubMed Tejpar S, Nollet F, Li C, Wunder JS, Michils G, dal Cin P, Van Cutsem E, Bapat
B, van Roy F, Cassiman JJ, Alman BA. Predominance of beta-catenin mutations and
beta-catenin dysregulation in sporadic aggressive fibromatosis (desmoid tumor).
Oncogene. 1999 Nov 11;18(47):6615-20. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203041. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Benign Tumors Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 1, 2013