Phosphoglycerate mutase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Phosphoglycerate mutase deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/phosphoglycerate-mutase-deficiency/ Phosphoglycerate mutase deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Phosphoglycerate mutase deficiency is a disorder that primarily affects muscles used for movement (skeletal muscles). Beginning in childhood or adolescence, affected individuals experience muscle aches or cramping following strenuous physical activity. Some people with this condition also have recurrent episodes of myoglobinuria. Myoglobinuria occurs when muscle tissue breaks down abnormally and releases a protein called myoglobin, which is processed by the kidneys and released in the urine. If untreated, myoglobinuria can lead to kidney failure. In some cases of phosphoglycerate mutase deficiency, microscopic tube-shaped structures called tubular aggregates are seen in muscle fibers. It is unclear how tubular aggregates are associated with the signs and symptoms of the disorder. Frequency Phosphoglycerate mutase deficiency is a rare condition; about 15 affected people have been reported in the medical literature. Most affected individuals have been African American. Causes Phosphoglycerate mutase deficiency is caused by mutations in the PGAM2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called phosphoglycerate mutase, which is involved in a critical energy-producing process in cells known as glycolysis. During glycolysis, the simple sugar glucose is broken down to produce energy. The version of phosphoglycerate mutase produced from the PGAM2 gene is found primarily in skeletal muscle cells. Mutations in the PGAM2 gene greatly reduce the activity of phosphoglycerate mutase, which disrupts energy production in these cells. This defect underlies the muscle cramping and myoglobinuria that occur after strenuous exercise in affected individuals. Learn more about the gene associated with Phosphoglycerate mutase deficiency PGAM2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the PGAM2 gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. However, people who carry one altered copy of the PGAM2 gene may have some features of phosphoglycerate mutase deficiency, including episodes of exercise-induced muscle cramping and myoglobinuria. Other Names for This Condition Deficiency mutase phosphoglycerate Glycogen storage disease X GSD X GSD10 GSDX Myopathy due to phosphoglycerate mutase deficiency PGAM deficiency PGAMM deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Glycogen storage disease type X Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Glycogen storage disease due to phosphoglycerate mutase deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE X; GSD10 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References DiMauro S, Miranda AF, Khan S, Gitlin K, Friedman R. Human muscle
phosphoglycerate mutase deficiency: newly discovered metabolic myopathy. Science.
1981 Jun 12;212(4500):1277-9. doi: 10.1126/science.6262916. Citation on PubMed Joshi PR, Knape M, Zierz S, Deschauer M. Phosphoglycerate mutase deficiency:
case report of a manifesting heterozygote with a novel E154K mutation and very
late onset. Acta Neuropathol. 2009 Jun;117(6):723-5. doi:
10.1007/s00401-009-0524-1. Epub 2009 Mar 26. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Naini A, Toscano A, Musumeci O, Vissing J, Akman HO, DiMauro S. Muscle
phosphoglycerate mutase deficiency revisited. Arch Neurol. 2009 Mar;66(3):394-8.
doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2008.584. Citation on PubMed Tonin P, Bruno C, Cassandrini D, Savio C, Tavazzi E, Tomelleri G, Piccolo G.
Unusual presentation of phosphoglycerate mutase deficiency due to two different
mutations in PGAM-M gene. Neuromuscul Disord. 2009 Nov;19(11):776-8. doi:
10.1016/j.nmd.2009.08.007. Epub 2009 Sep 23. Citation on PubMed Toscano A, Tsujino S, Vita G, Shanske S, Messina C, Dimauro S. Molecular basis
of muscle phosphoglycerate mutase (PGAM-M) deficiency in the Italian kindred.
Muscle Nerve. 1996 Sep;19(9):1134-7. doi:
10.1002/(SICI)1097-4598(199609)19:93.0.CO;2-0. Citation on PubMed Tsujino S, Shanske S, Sakoda S, Fenichel G, DiMauro S. The molecular genetic
basis of muscle phosphoglycerate mutase (PGAM) deficiency. Am J Hum Genet. 1993
Mar;52(3):472-7. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Tsujino S, Shanske S, Sakoda S, Toscano A, DiMauro S. Molecular genetic
studies in muscle phosphoglycerate mutase (PGAM-M) deficiency. Muscle Nerve
Suppl. 1995;3:S50-3. doi: 10.1002/mus.880181412. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Carbohydrate Metabolism Disorders Genetic Disorders Muscle Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 1, 2011