Childhood myocerebrohepatopathy spectrum: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Childhood myocerebrohepatopathy spectrum URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/childhood-myocerebrohepatopathy-spectrum/ Childhood myocerebrohepatopathy spectrum To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Childhood myocerebrohepatopathy spectrum, commonly called MCHS, is part of a group of conditions called the POLG -related disorders. The conditions in this group feature a range of similar signs and symptoms involving muscle-, nerve-, and brain-related functions. MCHS typically becomes apparent in children from a few months to 3 years old. People with this condition usually have problems with their muscles (myo-), brain (cerebro-), and liver (hepato-). Common signs and symptoms of MCHS include muscle weakness (myopathy), developmental delay or a deterioration of intellectual function, and liver disease. Another possible sign of this condition is a toxic buildup of lactic acid in the body (lactic acidosis). Often, affected children are unable to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive). Additional signs and symptoms of MCHS can include a form of kidney disease called renal tubular acidosis, inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis), recurrent episodes of nausea and vomiting (cyclic vomiting), or hearing loss. Frequency The prevalence of childhood myocerebrohepatopathy spectrum is unknown. Causes MCHS is caused by mutations in the POLG gene. This gene provides instructions for making one part, the alpha subunit, of a protein called polymerase gamma (pol γ). Pol γ functions in mitochondria , which are structures within cells that use oxygen to convert the energy from food into a form cells can use. Mitochondria each contain a small amount of DNA, known as mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), which is essential for the normal function of these structures. Pol γ "reads" sequences of mtDNA and uses them as templates to produce new copies of mtDNA in a process called DNA replication . Most POLG gene mutations change single protein building blocks ( amino acids ) in the alpha subunit of pol γ. These changes result in a mutated pol γ that has a reduced ability to replicate DNA. Although the mechanism is unknown, mutations in the POLG gene often result in fewer copies of mtDNA (mtDNA depletion), particularly in muscle, brain, or liver cells. MtDNA depletion causes a decrease in cellular energy, which could account for the signs and symptoms of MCHS. Learn more about the gene associated with Childhood myocerebrohepatopathy spectrum POLG Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition MCHS Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Progressive sclerosing poliodystrophy Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Cohen BH, Chinnery PF, Copeland WC. POLG-Related Disorders. 2010 Mar
16 [updated 2024 Feb 29]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace
SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA):
University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK26471/ Citation on PubMed Milone M, Massie R. Polymerase gamma 1 mutations: clinical correlations.
Neurologist. 2010 Mar;16(2):84-91. doi: 10.1097/NRL.0b013e3181c78a89. Citation on PubMed Moraes CT, Shanske S, Tritschler HJ, Aprille JR, Andreetta F, Bonilla E, Schon
EA, DiMauro S. mtDNA depletion with variable tissue expression: a novel genetic
abnormality in mitochondrial diseases. Am J Hum Genet. 1991 Mar;48(3):492-501. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Rocher C, Taanman JW, Pierron D, Faustin B, Benard G, Rossignol R, Malgat M,
Pedespan L, Letellier T. Influence of mitochondrial DNA level on cellular energy
metabolism: implications for mitochondrial diseases. J Bioenerg Biomembr. 2008
Apr;40(2):59-67. doi: 10.1007/s10863-008-9130-5. Epub 2008 Apr 16. Citation on PubMed Stumpf JD, Copeland WC. Mitochondrial DNA replication and disease: insights
from DNA polymerase gamma mutations. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2011 Jan;68(2):219-33. doi:
10.1007/s00018-010-0530-4. Epub 2010 Oct 8. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Genetic Brain Disorders Genetic Disorders Liver Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Lactic acidosis Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 1, 2011