Hereditary xanthinuria: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Hereditary xanthinuria URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/hereditary-xanthinuria/ Hereditary xanthinuria To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Hereditary xanthinuria is a condition that most often affects the kidneys. It is characterized by high levels of a compound called xanthine and very low levels of another compound called uric acid in the blood and urine. The excess xanthine can accumulate in the kidneys and other tissues. In the kidneys, xanthine forms tiny crystals that occasionally build up to create kidney stones . These stones can impair kidney function and ultimately cause kidney failure. Related signs and symptoms can include abdominal pain, recurrent urinary tract infections, and blood in the urine (hematuria). Less commonly, xanthine crystals build up in the muscles, causing pain and cramping. In some people with hereditary xanthinuria, the condition does not cause any health problems. Researchers have described two major forms of hereditary xanthinuria, types I and II. The types are distinguished by the enzymes involved; they have the same signs and symptoms. Frequency The combined incidence of hereditary xanthinuria types I and II is estimated to be about 1 in 69,000 people worldwide. However, researchers suspect that the true incidence may be higher because some affected individuals have no symptoms and are never diagnosed with the condition. Hereditary xanthinuria appears to be more common in people of Mediterranean or Middle Eastern ancestry. About 150 cases of this condition have been reported in the medical literature. Causes Hereditary xanthinuria type I is caused by mutations in the XDH gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called xanthine dehydrogenase. This enzyme is involved in the normal breakdown of purines, which are building blocks of DNA and its chemical cousin, RNA. Specifically, xanthine dehydrogenase carries out the final two steps in the process, including the conversion of xanthine to uric acid (which is excreted in urine and feces). Mutations in the XDH gene reduce or eliminate the activity of xanthine dehydrogenase. As a result, the enzyme is not available to help carry out the last two steps of purine breakdown. Because xanthine is not converted to uric acid, affected individuals have high levels of xanthine and very low levels of uric acid in their blood and urine. The excess xanthine can cause damage to the kidneys and other tissues. Hereditary xanthinuria type II results from mutations in the MOCOS gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called molybdenum cofactor sulfurase. This enzyme is necessary for the normal function of xanthine dehydrogenase, described above, and another enzyme called aldehyde oxidase. Mutations in the MOCOS gene prevent xanthine dehydrogenase and aldehyde oxidase from being turned on (activated). The loss of xanthine dehydrogenase activity prevents the conversion of xanthine to uric acid, leading to an accumulation of xanthine in the kidneys and other tissues. The loss of aldehyde oxidase activity does not appear to cause any health problems. Learn more about the genes associated with Hereditary xanthinuria MOCOS XDH Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Combined deficiency of xanthine dehydrogenase and aldehyde oxidase Xanthine dehydrogenase deficiency Xanthine oxidase deficiency Xanthinuria XDH deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary xanthinuria type 1 Genetic Testing Registry: Xanthinuria type II Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Xanthinuria type I Xanthinuria type II Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM XANTHINURIA, TYPE I; XAN1 XANTHINURIA, TYPE II; XAN2 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Ichida K, Amaya Y, Kamatani N, Nishino T, Hosoya T, Sakai O. Identification of
two mutations in human xanthine dehydrogenase gene responsible for classical type
I xanthinuria. J Clin Invest. 1997 May 15;99(10):2391-7. doi: 10.1172/JCI119421. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Ichida K, Amaya Y, Okamoto K, Nishino T. Mutations associated with functional
disorder of xanthine oxidoreductase and hereditary xanthinuria in humans. Int J
Mol Sci. 2012 Nov 21;13(11):15475-95. doi: 10.3390/ijms131115475. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Ichida K, Matsumura T, Sakuma R, Hosoya T, Nishino T. Mutation of human
molybdenum cofactor sulfurase gene is responsible for classical xanthinuria type
II. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Apr 20;282(5):1194-200. doi:
10.1006/bbrc.2001.4719. Citation on PubMed Mraz M, Hurba O, Bartl J, Dolezel Z, Marinaki A, Fairbanks L, Stiburkova B.
Modern diagnostic approach to hereditary xanthinuria. Urolithiasis. 2015
Feb;43(1):61-7. doi: 10.1007/s00240-014-0734-4. Epub 2014 Nov 6. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Kidney Diseases Kidney Stones MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Kidney stones Uric acid - blood Related Medical Tests Crystals in Urine Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 1, 2015