Biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/biotin-thiamine-responsive-basal-ganglia-disease/ Biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease is a disorder that affects the nervous system, including a group of structures in the brain called the basal ganglia, which help control movement. As its name suggests, the condition may improve if the vitamins biotin and thiamine are given as treatment. Without early and lifelong vitamin treatment, people with biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease experience a variety of neurological problems that gradually get worse. The occurrence of specific neurological problems and their severity vary even among affected individuals within the same family. The signs and symptoms of biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease usually begin between the ages of 3 and 10, but the disorder can appear at any age. Many of the neurological problems that can occur in biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease affect movement, and can include involuntary tensing of various muscles (dystonia), muscle rigidity, muscle weakness on one or both sides of the body (hemiparesis or quadriparesis), problems coordinating movements (ataxia), and exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia). Movement problems can also affect the face, and may include the inability to move facial muscles due to facial nerve paralysis (supranuclear facial palsy), paralysis of the eye muscles (external ophthalmoplegia), difficulty chewing or swallowing (dysphagia), and slurred speech. Affected individuals may also experience confusion, loss of previously learned skills, intellectual disability, and seizures. Severe cases may result in coma and become life-threatening. Typically, the neurological symptoms occur as increasingly severe episodes, which may be triggered by fever, injury, or other stresses on the body. Less commonly, the signs and symptoms persist at the same level or slowly increase in severity over time rather than occurring as episodes that come and go. In these individuals, the neurological problems are usually limited to dystonia, seizure disorders, and delay in the development of mental and motor skills (psychomotor delay). Frequency Biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease is a rare disorder; its prevalence is unknown. Approximately 48 cases have been reported in the medical literature; most of these are individuals from Arab populations. Causes Biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease is caused by mutations in the SLC19A3 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called a thiamine transporter, which moves thiamine into cells. Thiamine, also known as  vitamin B1, is obtained from the diet and is necessary for proper functioning of the nervous system. Mutations in the SLC19A3 gene likely result in a protein with impaired ability to transport thiamine into cells, resulting in decreased absorption of the vitamin and leading to neurological dysfunction. In this disorder, abnormalities affect several parts of the brain. Using medical imaging, generalized swelling as well as specific areas of damage (lesions) in the brain can often be seen, including in the basal ganglia. The relationship between these specific brain abnormalities and the abnormal thiamine transporter is unknown. It is unclear how biotin is related to this disorder. Some researchers suggest that the excess biotin given along with thiamine as treatment for the disorder may increase the amount of thiamine transporter that is produced, partially compensating for the impaired efficiency of the abnormal protein. Others propose that biotin transporter proteins may interact with thiamine transporters in such a way that biotin levels influence the course of the disease. Learn more about the gene associated with Biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease SLC19A3 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition BBGD Biotin-responsive basal ganglia disease BTBGD Thiamine metabolism dysfunction syndrome 2 Thiamine transporter-2 deficiency Thiamine-responsive encephalopathy THMD2 Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Biotin-responsive basal ganglia disease Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM BASAL GANGLIA DISEASE, BIOTIN-THIAMINE RESPONSIVE; BTBGD Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Alfadhel M, Almuntashri M, Jadah RH, Bashiri FA, Al Rifai MT, Al Shalaan H, Al
Balwi M, Al Rumayan A, Eyaid W, Al-Twaijri W. Biotin-responsive basal ganglia
disease should be renamed biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease: a
retrospective review of the clinical, radiological and molecular findings of 18
new cases. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2013 Jun 6;8:83. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-83. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Debs R, Depienne C, Rastetter A, Bellanger A, Degos B, Galanaud D, Keren B,
Lyon-Caen O, Brice A, Sedel F. Biotin-responsive basal ganglia disease in ethnic
Europeans with novel SLC19A3 mutations. Arch Neurol. 2010 Jan;67(1):126-30. doi:
10.1001/archneurol.2009.293. Citation on PubMed El-Hajj TI, Karam PE, Mikati MA. Biotin-responsive basal ganglia disease: case
report and review of the literature. Neuropediatrics. 2008 Oct;39(5):268-71. doi:
10.1055/s-0028-1128152. Epub 2009 Mar 17. Citation on PubMed Tabarki B, Al-Hashem A, Ortigoza-Escobar JD, Alsharhan H, Alfadhel M.
Biotin-Thiamine-Responsive Basal Ganglia Disease. 2013 Nov 21 [updated 2025 Jan
9]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington,
Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK169615/ Citation on PubMed Tabarki B, Al-Shafi S, Al-Shahwan S, Azmat Z, Al-Hashem A, Al-Adwani N, Biary
N, Al-Zawahmah M, Khan S, Zuccoli G. Biotin-responsive basal ganglia disease
revisited: clinical, radiologic, and genetic findings. Neurology. 2013 Jan
15;80(3):261-7. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31827deb4c. Epub 2012 Dec 26. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics B Vitamins Brain Diseases Genetic Disorders Movement Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Basal ganglia dysfunction Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated January 1, 2014