Legius syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Legius syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/legius-syndrome/ Legius syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Legius syndrome is a condition characterized by changes in skin coloring (pigmentation).  Almost all affected individuals have multiple café-au-lait spots, which are flat patches on the skin that are darker than the surrounding area. Another pigmentation change, freckles in the armpits and groin, may occur in some affected individuals. Other signs and symptoms of Legius syndrome may include an abnormally large head ( macrocephaly ) and unusual facial characteristics. Although most people with Legius syndrome have normal intelligence, some affected individuals have been diagnosed with learning disabilities, attention-deficit disorder (ADD), or attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Many of the signs and symptoms of Legius syndrome also occur in a similar disorder called neurofibromatosis type 1 . It can be difficult to tell the two disorders apart in early childhood. However, the features of the two disorders differ later in life. Frequency The prevalence of Legius syndrome is unknown. Many individuals with this disorder are likely misdiagnosed because the signs and symptoms of Legius syndrome are similar to those of neurofibromatosis type 1. Causes Mutations in the SPRED1 gene cause Legius syndrome. The SPRED1 gene provides instructions for making the Spred-1 protein. This protein controls (regulates) an important cell signaling pathway that is involved in the growth and division  of cells (proliferation), the process by which cells mature to carry out specific functions (differentiation), cell movement, and the self-destruction of cells ( apoptosis ). Mutations in the SPRED1 gene lead to a nonfunctional protein that can no longer regulate the pathway, resulting in overactive signaling. It is unclear how mutations in the SPRED1 gene cause the signs and symptoms of Legius syndrome. Learn more about the gene associated with Legius syndrome SPRED1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition Neurofibromatosis type 1-like syndrome NFLS Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Legius syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Legius syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM LEGIUS SYNDROME; LGSS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Brems H, Chmara M, Sahbatou M, Denayer E, Taniguchi K, Kato R, Somers R,
Messiaen L, De Schepper S, Fryns JP, Cools J, Marynen P, Thomas G, Yoshimura A,
Legius E. Germline loss-of-function mutations in SPRED1 cause a neurofibromatosis
1-like phenotype. Nat Genet. 2007 Sep;39(9):1120-6. doi: 10.1038/ng2113. Epub
2007 Aug 19. Citation on PubMed Denayer E, Chmara M, Brems H, Kievit AM, van Bever Y, Van den Ouweland AM, Van
Minkelen R, de Goede-Bolder A, Oostenbrink R, Lakeman P, Beert E, Ishizaki T,
Mori T, Keymolen K, Van den Ende J, Mangold E, Peltonen S, Brice G, Rankin J, Van
Spaendonck-Zwarts KY, Yoshimura A, Legius E. Legius syndrome in fourteen
families. Hum Mutat. 2011 Jan;32(1):E1985-98. doi: 10.1002/humu.21404. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Legius E, Stevenson D. Legius Syndrome. 2010 Oct 14 [updated 2020 Aug 6]. In:
Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington,
Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK47312/ Citation on PubMed Messiaen L, Yao S, Brems H, Callens T, Sathienkijkanchai A, Denayer E, Spencer
E, Arn P, Babovic-Vuksanovic D, Bay C, Bobele G, Cohen BH, Escobar L, Eunpu D,
Grebe T, Greenstein R, Hachen R, Irons M, Kronn D, Lemire E, Leppig K, Lim C,
McDonald M, Narayanan V, Pearn A, Pedersen R, Powell B, Shapiro LR, Skidmore D,
Tegay D, Thiese H, Zackai EH, Vijzelaar R, Taniguchi K, Ayada T, Okamoto F,
Yoshimura A, Parret A, Korf B, Legius E. Clinical and mutational spectrum of
neurofibromatosis type 1-like syndrome. JAMA. 2009 Nov 18;302(19):2111-8. doi:
10.1001/jama.2009.1663. Erratum In: JAMA. 2010 Jun 23;303(24):2477. Citation on PubMed Pasmant E, Sabbagh A, Hanna N, Masliah-Planchon J, Jolly E, Goussard P,
Ballerini P, Cartault F, Barbarot S, Landman-Parker J, Soufir N, Parfait B,
Vidaud M, Wolkenstein P, Vidaud D, France RN. SPRED1 germline mutations caused a
neurofibromatosis type 1 overlapping phenotype. J Med Genet. 2009
Jul;46(7):425-30. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2008.065243. Epub 2009 Apr 14. Citation on PubMed Spurlock G, Bennett E, Chuzhanova N, Thomas N, Jim HP, Side L, Davies S, Haan
E, Kerr B, Huson SM, Upadhyaya M. SPRED1 mutations (Legius syndrome): another
clinically useful genotype for dissecting the neurofibromatosis type 1 phenotype.
J Med Genet. 2009 Jul;46(7):431-7. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2008.065474. Epub 2009 May
13. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Skin Pigmentation Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2011