Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/spinal-and-bulbar-muscular-atrophy/ Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy, also known as Kennedy disease, is a disorder of specialized nerve cells that control muscle movement (motor neurons). These nerve cells originate in the spinal cord and the part of the brain that is connected to the spinal cord ( the brainstem ). Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy mainly affects males and is characterized by muscle weakness and wasting (atrophy) that usually begins in adulthood and worsens slowly over time. Muscle wasting in the arms and legs results in cramping; leg muscle weakness can also lead to difficulty walking and a tendency to fall. Certain muscles in the face and throat (bulbar muscles) are also affected, which causes progressive problems with swallowing and speech. Additionally, muscle twitches (fasciculations) are common. Some males with the disorder experience unusual breast development (gynecomastia) and may be unable to father a child (infertile). Frequency This condition affects fewer than 1 in 150,000 males and is very rare in females. Causes Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy results from a particular type of mutation in the AR gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called an androgen receptor . This receptor attaches (binds) to a class of hormones called androgens, which are involved in male sexual development. Androgens and androgen receptors also have other important functions in both males and females, such as regulating hair growth and sex drive. The AR gene mutation that causes spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy is the abnormal expansion of a DNA segment called a CAG triplet repeat . Normally, this DNA segment is repeated up to about 36 times. In people with spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy, the CAG segment is repeated at least 38 times, and it may be two or three times its usual length. Although the extended CAG region changes the structure of the androgen receptor, it is unclear how the altered protein disrupts nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord. Researchers believe that a fragment of the androgen receptor protein containing the CAG segment accumulates within these cells and interferes with normal cell functions. The nerve cells gradually die, leading to the muscle weakness and wasting seen in this condition. People with a higher number of CAG repeats tend to develop signs and symptoms of spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy at an earlier age. Learn more about the gene associated with Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy AR Inheritance This condition is inherited in an X-linked pattern. A condition is considered X-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), a mutation in the only copy of the gene in each cell causes the disorder. In most cases, males experience more severe symptoms of the disorder than females (who have two X chromosomes). Females with a mutation in one copy of the AR gene in each cell are typically unaffected. A few females with mutations in both copies of the gene have had mild features related to the condition, including muscle cramps and occasional tremors. Researchers believe that the milder signs and symptoms in females may be related to lower androgen levels. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons. Other Names for This Condition Bulbospinal muscular atrophy, X-linked KD Kennedy disease Kennedy spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy Kennedy's disease SBMA X-linked spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Kennedy disease Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Kennedy disease Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM SPINAL AND BULBAR MUSCULAR ATROPHY, X-LINKED 1; SMAX1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Atsuta N, Watanabe H, Ito M, Banno H, Suzuki K, Katsuno M, Tanaka F, Tamakoshi
A, Sobue G. Natural history of spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA): a study
of 223 Japanese patients. Brain. 2006 Jun;129(Pt 6):1446-55. doi:
10.1093/brain/awl096. Epub 2006 Apr 18. Citation on PubMed Finsterer J. Bulbar and spinal muscular atrophy (Kennedy's disease): a review.
Eur J Neurol. 2009 May;16(5):556-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2009.02591.x. Citation on PubMed Finsterer J. Perspectives of Kennedy's disease. J Neurol Sci. 2010 Nov
15;298(1-2):1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2010.08.025. Epub 2010 Sep 16. Citation on PubMed Katsuno M, Banno H, Suzuki K, Adachi H, Tanaka F, Sobue G. Clinical features
and molecular mechanisms of spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA). Adv Exp
Med Biol. 2010;685:64-74. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-6448-9_6. Citation on PubMed La Spada A. Spinal and Bulbar Muscular Atrophy. 1999 Feb 26 [updated 2022 Dec
15]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington,
Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1333/ Citation on PubMed Monks DA, Rao P, Mo K, Johansen JA, Lewis G, Kemp MQ. Androgen receptor and
Kennedy disease/spinal bulbar muscular atrophy. Horm Behav. 2008
May;53(5):729-40. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2007.12.009. Epub 2008 Jan 5. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Poletti A, Negri-Cesi P, Martini L. Reflections on the diseases linked to
mutations of the androgen receptor. Endocrine. 2005 Dec;28(3):243-62. doi:
10.1385/ENDO:28:3:243. Citation on PubMed Schmidt BJ, Greenberg CR, Allingham-Hawkins DJ, Spriggs EL. Expression of
X-linked bulbospinal muscular atrophy (Kennedy disease) in two homozygous women.
Neurology. 2002 Sep 10;59(5):770-2. doi: 10.1212/wnl.59.5.770. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Spinal Muscular Atrophy MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Muscle atrophy Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 1, 2020