MyD88 deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → MyD88 deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/myd88-deficiency/ MyD88 deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description MyD88 deficiency is an inherited disorder of the immune system (primary immunodeficiency). This primary immunodeficiency affects the innate immune response, which is the body's early, nonspecific response to foreign invaders (pathogens). MyD88 deficiency leads to abnormally frequent and severe infections by a subset of bacteria known as pyogenic bacteria. (Infection with pyogenic bacteria causes the production of pus.) However, affected individuals have normal resistance to other common bacteria, viruses, fungi, and parasites. The most common infections in MyD88 deficiency are caused by the Streptococcus pneumoniae , Staphylococcus aureus , and Pseudomonas aeruginosa bacteria. Most people with this condition have their first bacterial infection before age 2, and the infections can be life-threatening in infancy and childhood. Infections become less frequent by about age 10. Children with MyD88 deficiency develop invasive bacterial infections, which can involve the blood (septicemia), the membrane covering the brain and spinal cord (meningitis), or the joints (leading to inflammation and arthritis). Invasive infections can also cause areas of tissue breakdown and pus production (abscesses) on internal organs. In addition, affected individuals can have localized infections of the ears, nose, or throat. Although fever is a common reaction to bacterial infections, many people with MyD88 deficiency do not at first develop a high fever in response to these infections, even if the infection is severe. Frequency The prevalence of MyD88 deficiency is unknown. At least 24 affected individuals have been described in the medical literature. Causes MyD88 deficiency is caused by mutations in the MYD88 gene, which provides instructions for making a protein that plays an important role in stimulating the immune system to respond to bacterial infection. The MyD88 protein is part of a signaling pathway that is involved in early recognition of pathogens and the initiation of inflammation to fight infection. This signaling pathway is part of the innate immune response. Mutations in the MYD88 gene lead to the production of a nonfunctional protein or no protein at all. The loss of functional MyD88 protein prevents the immune system from triggering inflammation in response to pathogens that would normally help fight the infections. Because the early immune response is insufficient, bacterial infections occur often and become severe and invasive. Researchers suggest that as the immune system matures, other systems compensate for the loss of MyD88 protein, accounting for the improvement in the condition that occurs by adolescence. Learn more about the gene associated with MyD88 deficiency MYD88 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition MYD88 deficiency Pyogenic bacterial infections due to MyD88 deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Pyogenic bacterial infections due to MyD88 deficiency Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Bacterial susceptibility due to TLR signaling pathway deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM IMMUNODEFICIENCY 68; IMD68 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Maglione PJ, Simchoni N, Black S, Radigan L, Overbey JR, Bagiella E, Bussel
JB, Bossuyt X, Casanova JL, Meyts I, Cerutti A, Picard C, Cunningham-Rundles C.
IRAK-4 and MyD88 deficiencies impair IgM responses against T-independent
bacterial antigens. Blood. 2014 Dec 4;124(24):3561-71. doi:
10.1182/blood-2014-07-587824. Epub 2014 Oct 15. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Picard C, Casanova JL, Puel A. Infectious diseases in patients with IRAK-4,
MyD88, NEMO, or IkappaBalpha deficiency. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2011 Jul;24(3):490-7. doi:
10.1128/CMR.00001-11. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Picard C, von Bernuth H, Ghandil P, Chrabieh M, Levy O, Arkwright PD, McDonald
D, Geha RS, Takada H, Krause JC, Creech CB, Ku CL, Ehl S, Marodi L, Al-Muhsen S,
Al-Hajjar S, Al-Ghonaium A, Day-Good NK, Holland SM, Gallin JI, Chapel H, Speert
DP, Rodriguez-Gallego C, Colino E, Garty BZ, Roifman C, Hara T, Yoshikawa H,
Nonoyama S, Domachowske J, Issekutz AC, Tang M, Smart J, Zitnik SE, Hoarau C,
Kumararatne DS, Thrasher AJ, Davies EG, Bethune C, Sirvent N, de Ricaud D,
Camcioglu Y, Vasconcelos J, Guedes M, Vitor AB, Rodrigo C, Almazan F, Mendez M,
Arostegui JI, Alsina L, Fortuny C, Reichenbach J, Verbsky JW, Bossuyt X,
Doffinger R, Abel L, Puel A, Casanova JL. Clinical features and outcome of
patients with IRAK-4 and MyD88 deficiency. Medicine (Baltimore). 2010
Nov;89(6):403-425. doi: 10.1097/MD.0b013e3181fd8ec3. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central von Bernuth H, Picard C, Jin Z, Pankla R, Xiao H, Ku CL, Chrabieh M, Mustapha
IB, Ghandil P, Camcioglu Y, Vasconcelos J, Sirvent N, Guedes M, Vitor AB,
Herrero-Mata MJ, Arostegui JI, Rodrigo C, Alsina L, Ruiz-Ortiz E, Juan M, Fortuny
C, Yague J, Anton J, Pascal M, Chang HH, Janniere L, Rose Y, Garty BZ, Chapel H,
Issekutz A, Marodi L, Rodriguez-Gallego C, Banchereau J, Abel L, Li X, Chaussabel
D, Puel A, Casanova JL. Pyogenic bacterial infections in humans with MyD88
deficiency. Science. 2008 Aug 1;321(5889):691-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1158298. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central von Bernuth H, Picard C, Puel A, Casanova JL. Experimental and natural
infections in MyD88- and IRAK-4-deficient mice and humans. Eur J Immunol. 2012
Dec;42(12):3126-35. doi: 10.1002/eji.201242683. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Yamamoto T, Tsutsumi N, Tochio H, Ohnishi H, Kubota K, Kato Z, Shirakawa M,
Kondo N. Functional assessment of the mutational effects of human IRAK4 and MyD88
genes. Mol Immunol. 2014 Mar;58(1):66-76. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2013.11.008. Epub
2013 Dec 5. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Immune System and Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Immunodeficiency disorders Meningitis Septicemia Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 1, 2015