Nager syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Nager syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/nager-syndrome/ Nager syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Nager syndrome is a rare condition that mainly affects the development of the face, hands, and arms. The severity of this disorder varies among affected individuals. Children with Nager syndrome are born with underdeveloped cheek bones (malar hypoplasia) and a very small lower jaw ( micrognathia ). They often have an opening in the roof of the mouth called a cleft palate . These abnormalities frequently cause feeding problems in infants with Nager syndrome. The airway is usually partially blocked due to the micrognathia, which can lead to life-threatening breathing problems. People with Nager syndrome often have eyes that slant downward (downslanting palpebral fissures), no eyelashes , and a notch in the lower eyelids called an eyelid coloboma . Many affected individuals have small or unusually formed ears, and about 60 percent have hearing loss caused by defects in the middle ear (conductive hearing loss). Nager syndrome does not affect a person's intelligence, although speech development may be delayed due to hearing impairment. Individuals with Nager syndrome have bone abnormalities in their hands and arms. The most common abnormality is malformed or absent thumbs . Affected individuals may also have fingers that are unusually curved ( clinodactyly ) or fused together ( syndactyly ). Their forearms may be shortened due to the partial or complete absence of a bone called the radius. People with Nager syndrome sometimes have difficulty fully extending their elbows. This condition can also cause bone abnormalities in the legs and feet. Less commonly, affected individuals have abnormalities of the heart, kidneys, genitalia, and urinary tract . Frequency Nager syndrome is a rare condition. Its prevalence is unknown. More than 75 cases have been reported in the medical literature. Causes More than half of cases of Nager syndrome are caused by mutations in the SF3B4 gene. The cause of the remainder of cases is unknown; other genes are thought to be involved in the condition. The SF3B4 gene provides instructions for making the SAP49 protein, which is one piece of a complex called a spliceosome. Spliceosomes help process messenger RNA (mRNA), which is a chemical cousin of DNA that serves as a genetic blueprint for making proteins. The spliceosomes recognize and then remove regions from mRNA molecules that are not used in the blueprint (which are called introns ). The SAP49 protein may also be involved in a chemical signaling pathway known as the bone morphogenic protein (BMP) pathway. This signaling pathway regulates various cellular processes and is involved in the growth of cells. The SAP49 protein is particularly important for the maturation of cells that build bones and cartilage (osteoblasts and chondrocytes). SF3B4 gene mutations that cause Nager syndrome prevent the production of functional SAP49 protein. Although the effect of this protein shortage is unknown, researchers suspect that it disrupts spliceosome formation, which may impair mRNA processing and alter the activity of genes involved in the development of several parts of the body. A loss of SAP49 may also impair BMP pathway signaling, leading to abnormal development of bones in the face, hands, and arms. Learn more about the gene associated with Nager syndrome SF3B4 Inheritance When caused by mutations in the SF3B4 gene, Nager syndrome follows an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Most cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Less commonly, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent . Autosomal dominant Nager syndrome may also be caused by mutations in other genes. Nager syndrome can also be inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of a gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of a mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Nager syndrome is suspected to have an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern when unaffected parents have more than one affected child. The genetic cause in these families is unknown. Other Names for This Condition Acrofacial dysostosis 1, Nager type AFD1 NAFD Nager acrofacial dysostosis Nager acrofacial dysostosis syndrome Preaxial acrofacial dysostosis Preaxial mandibulofacial dysostosis Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Nager syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Nager syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM ACROFACIAL DYSOSTOSIS 1, NAGER TYPE; AFD1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bernier FP, Caluseriu O, Ng S, Schwartzentruber J, Buckingham KJ, Innes AM,
Jabs EW, Innis JW, Schuette JL, Gorski JL, Byers PH, Andelfinger G, Siu V, Lauzon
J, Fernandez BA, McMillin M, Scott RH, Racher H; FORGE Canada Consortium;
Majewski J, Nickerson DA, Shendure J, Bamshad MJ, Parboosingh JS.
Haploinsufficiency of SF3B4, a component of the pre-mRNA spliceosomal complex,
causes Nager syndrome. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 May 4;90(5):925-33. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.04.004. Epub 2012 Apr 26. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Cassina M, Cerqua C, Rossi S, Salviati L, Martini A, Clementi M, Trevisson E.
A synonymous splicing mutation in the SF3B4 gene segregates in a family with
highly variable Nager syndrome. Eur J Hum Genet. 2017 Feb;25(3):371-375. doi:
10.1038/ejhg.2016.176. Epub 2016 Dec 14. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Couyoumjian CA, Treadwell MC, Barr M. Prenatal sonographic diagnosis of Nager
acrofacial dysostosis with unilateral upper limb involvement. Prenat Diagn. 2008
Oct;28(10):964-6. doi: 10.1002/pd.2074. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Czeschik JC, Voigt C, Alanay Y, Albrecht B, Avci S, Fitzpatrick D, Goudie DR,
Hehr U, Hoogeboom AJ, Kayserili H, Simsek-Kiper PO, Klein-Hitpass L, Kuechler A,
Lopez-Gonzalez V, Martin M, Rahmann S, Schweiger B, Splitt M, Wollnik B, Ludecke
HJ, Zeschnigk M, Wieczorek D. Clinical and mutation data in 12 patients with the
clinical diagnosis of Nager syndrome. Hum Genet. 2013 Aug;132(8):885-98. doi:
10.1007/s00439-013-1295-2. Epub 2013 Apr 9. Citation on PubMed Halonen K, Hukki J, Arte S, Hurmerinta K. Craniofacial structures and dental
development in three patients with Nager syndrome. J Craniofac Surg. 2006
Nov;17(6):1180-7. doi: 10.1097/01.scs.0000246494.08700.ab. Citation on PubMed Herrmann BW, Karzon R, Molter DW. Otologic and audiologic features of Nager
acrofacial dysostosis. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2005 Aug;69(8):1053-9.
doi: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2005.02.011. Epub 2005 Mar 19. Citation on PubMed Ho AS, Aleshi P, Cohen SE, Koltai PJ, Cheng AG. Airway management in Nager
Syndrome. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2008 Dec;72(12):1885-8. doi:
10.1016/j.ijporl.2008.09.007. Epub 2008 Oct 22. Citation on PubMed Petit F, Escande F, Jourdain AS, Porchet N, Amiel J, Doray B, Delrue MA, Flori
E, Kim CA, Marlin S, Robertson SP, Manouvrier-Hanu S, Holder-Espinasse M. Nager
syndrome: confirmation of SF3B4 haploinsufficiency as the major cause. Clin
Genet. 2014 Sep;86(3):246-51. doi: 10.1111/cge.12259. Epub 2013 Sep 12. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Bone Diseases Craniofacial Abnormalities Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Cleft lip and palate Genetics Hearing loss - infants Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2017