Combined pituitary hormone deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Combined pituitary hormone deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/combined-pituitary-hormone-deficiency/ Combined pituitary hormone deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Combined pituitary hormone deficiency is a condition that causes a shortage (deficiency) of several hormones produced by the pituitary gland, which is located at the base of the brain. A lack of these hormones may affect the development of many parts of the body. The first signs of this condition include a failure to grow at the expected rate and short stature that usually becomes apparent in early childhood. People with combined pituitary hormone deficiency may have hypothyroidism, which is underactivity of the butterfly-shaped thyroid gland in the lower neck. Hypothyroidism can cause many symptoms, including weight gain and fatigue. Other features of combined pituitary hormone deficiency include delayed or absent puberty and lack the ability to have biological children (infertility). The condition can also be associated with a deficiency of the hormone cortisol . Cortisol deficiency can impair the body's immune system, causing individuals to be more susceptible to infection. Rarely, people with combined pituitary hormone deficiency have intellectual disability; a short, stiff neck; or underdeveloped optic nerves, which carry visual information from the eyes to the brain. Frequency The prevalence of combined pituitary hormone deficiency is estimated to be 1 in 8,000 individuals worldwide. Causes Mutations in at least eight genes have been found to cause combined pituitary hormone deficiency. Mutations in the PROP1 gene are the most common known cause of this disorder, accounting for an estimated 12 to 55 percent of cases. Mutations in other genes have each been identified in a smaller number of affected individuals. The genes associated with combined pituitary hormone deficiency provide instructions for making proteins called transcription factors, which help control the activity of many other genes. The proteins are involved in the development of the pituitary gland and the specialization (differentiation) of its cell types. The cells of the pituitary gland are responsible for triggering the release of several hormones that direct the development of many parts of the body. Some of the transcription factors are found only in the pituitary gland, and some are also active in other parts of the body. Mutations in the genes associated with combined pituitary hormone deficiency can result in abnormal differentiation of pituitary gland cells and may prevent the production of several hormones. These hormones can include growth hormone (GH), which is needed for normal growth; follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH), which both play a role in sexual development and the ability to have children (fertility); thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), which helps with thyroid gland function; prolactin, which stimulates the production of breast milk; and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), which influences energy production in the body and maintains normal blood glucose and blood pressure levels. The degree to which these hormones are deficient is variable, with prolactin and ACTH showing the most variability. In many affected individuals, ACTH deficiency does not occur until late adulthood. Most people with combined pituitary hormone deficiency do not have identified mutations in any of the genes known to be associated with this condition. The cause of the disorder in these individuals is unknown. Learn more about the genes associated with Combined pituitary hormone deficiency HESX1 OTX2 PROKR2 PROP1 SOX2 Additional Information from NCBI Gene: GLI2 LHX3 LHX4 POU1F1 Inheritance Most cases of combined pituitary hormone deficiency are sporadic, which means they occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Less commonly, this condition has been found to run in families. When the disorder is familial, it can have an autosomal dominant or an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. Autosomal dominant inheritance means one copy of an altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Autosomal recessive inheritance means both copies of a gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of a mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Most cases of familial combined pituitary hormone deficiency are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Other Names for This Condition CPHD Panhypopituitarism Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Combined pituitary hormone deficiencies, genetic form Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Combined pituitary hormone deficiencies, genetic forms Non-acquired combined pituitary hormone deficiency-sensorineural hearing loss-spine abnormalities syndrome Pituitary hormone deficiency, combined 1 Short stature-pituitary and cerebellar defects-small sella turcica syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PITUITARY HORMONE DEFICIENCY, COMBINED, 3; CPHD3 PITUITARY HORMONE DEFICIENCY, COMBINED, 2; CPHD2 PITUITARY HORMONE DEFICIENCY, COMBINED, 4; CPHD4 PITUITARY HORMONE DEFICIENCY, COMBINED OR ISOLATED, 1; CPHD1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Kelberman D, Rizzoti K, Lovell-Badge R, Robinson IC, Dattani MT. Genetic
regulation of pituitary gland development in human and mouse. Endocr Rev. 2009
Dec;30(7):790-829. doi: 10.1210/er.2009-0008. Epub 2009 Oct 16. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Kelberman D, Turton JP, Woods KS, Mehta A, Al-Khawari M, Greening J, Swift PG,
Otonkoski T, Rhodes SJ, Dattani MT. Molecular analysis of novel PROP1 mutations
associated with combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD). Clin Endocrinol
(Oxf). 2009 Jan;70(1):96-103. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2265.2008.03326.x. Epub 2008
Jun 25. Citation on PubMed Mody S, Brown MR, Parks JS. The spectrum of hypopituitarism caused by PROP1
mutations. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Sep;16(3):421-31. doi:
10.1053/beem.2002.0218. Citation on PubMed Reynaud R, Gueydan M, Saveanu A, Vallette-Kasic S, Enjalbert A, Brue T,
Barlier A. Genetic screening of combined pituitary hormone deficiency: experience
in 195 patients. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Sep;91(9):3329-36. doi:
10.1210/jc.2005-2173. Epub 2006 May 30. Citation on PubMed Vieira TC, Boldarine VT, Abucham J. Molecular analysis of PROP1, PIT1, HESX1,
LHX3, and LHX4 shows high frequency of PROP1 mutations in patients with familial
forms of combined pituitary hormone deficiency. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2007
Oct;51(7):1097-103. doi: 10.1590/s0004-27302007000700012. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Pituitary Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA ACTH blood test Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) blood test Genetics Growth hormone deficiency - children Prolactin blood test Short stature TSH test Related Medical Tests Adrenocorticotropic Hormone (ACTH) Cortisol Test Follicle-Stimulating Hormone (FSH) Levels Test Luteinizing Hormone (LH) Levels Test Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2010