Congenital stromal corneal dystrophy: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Congenital stromal corneal dystrophy URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/congenital-stromal-corneal-dystrophy/ Congenital stromal corneal dystrophy To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Congenital stromal corneal dystrophy is an inherited eye disorder that primarily affects the clear layer that covers the front surface of the eye (cornea). Affected individuals have multiple corneal opacities, which are damaged areas that cause the cornea to appear cloudy or opaque rather than transparent. These corneal opacities form in the thickest layer of the cornea (stroma) and are typically present in both eyes (bilateral) from birth or soon thereafter. The corneas of affected individuals may also be thicker than normal and have an irregular surface. These corneal changes lead to a loss of visual acuity, which can impair a person’s ability to see clearly. Without treatment, visual acuity can worsen over time. Congenital stromal corneal dystrophy is often associated with additional eye abnormalities, including eyes that do not look in the same direction (strabismus) and "lazy eye" (amblyopia). Less commonly, affected individuals may have involuntary eye movements (nystagmus) or increased sensitivity to light (photophobia). Frequency Congenital stromal corneal dystrophy is rare; only a few affected families have been reported in the medical literature. Causes Congenital stromal corneal dystrophy is caused by variants (also called mutations) in the DCN gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called decorin, which is involved in the organization of collagens. Collagens are proteins that strengthen and support connective tissues such as skin, bone, tendons, and ligaments. Collagens also play an important role in the cornea. Bundles of collagen called fibrils must be strictly organized for the cornea to be transparent. Decorin helps ensure that these collagen fibrils are the right size and are regularly spaced. The variants in the DCN gene that cause congenital stromal corneal dystrophy lead to the production of an abnormal version of decorin that does not function as it should. Researchers believe that this abnormal protein accumulates in the cornea, which causes the cornea to become cloudy. The accumulation of abnormal decorin may also lead to the other eye abnormalities seen in people with congenital stromal corneal dystrophy. Learn more about the gene associated with Congenital stromal corneal dystrophy DCN Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Some cases of this condition likely result from new (de novo) variants in the gene that occur during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) in an affected individual's parent or during early embryonic development. These affected individuals typically have no history of the disorder in their family. Other Names for This Condition Congenital hereditary stromal dystrophy of the cornea Congenital stromal dystrophy of the cornea CSCD Decorin-associated congenital stromal corneal dystrophy Dystrophia corneae parenchymatosa congenita Witschel dystrophy Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital Stromal Corneal Dystrophy Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CORNEAL DYSTROPHY, CONGENITAL STROMAL; CSCD Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bredrup C, Knappskog PM, Majewski J, Rodahl E, Boman H. Congenital stromal
dystrophy of the cornea caused by a mutation in the decorin gene. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2005 Feb;46(2):420-6. doi: 10.1167/iovs.04-0804. Citation on PubMed Bredrup C, Stang E, Bruland O, Palka BP, Young RD, Haavik J, Knappskog PM,
Rodahl E. Decorin accumulation contributes to the stromal opacities found in
congenital stromal corneal dystrophy. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2010
Nov;51(11):5578-82. doi: 10.1167/iovs.09-4933. Epub 2010 May 19. Citation on PubMed Cascieri MA, Bayne ML, Ber E, Green BG, Men GW, Chicchi GG. Identification of
the insulin-like growth factor I (IGF I) epitopes recognized by monoclonal and
polyclonal antibodies to IGF I. Endocrinology. 1990 Jun;126(6):2773-7. doi:
10.1210/endo-126-6-2773. Citation on PubMed Klintworth GK. Corneal dystrophies. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2009 Feb 23;4:7. doi:
10.1186/1750-1172-4-7. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Rodahl E, Knappskog PM, Bredrup C, Boman H. Congenital Stromal Corneal
Dystrophy. 2008 Nov 25 [updated 2018 Nov 29]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM,
Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK2690/ Citation on PubMed Van Ginderdeuren R, De Vos R, Casteels I, Foets B. Report of a new family with
dominant congenital heredity stromal dystrophy of the cornea. Cornea. 2002
Jan;21(1):118-20. doi: 10.1097/00003226-200201000-00025. Citation on PubMed Witschel H, Fine BS, Grutzner P, McTigue JW. Congenital hereditary stromal
dystrophy of the cornea. Arch Ophthalmol. 1978 Jun;96(6):1043-51. doi:
10.1001/archopht.1978.03910050563015. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Corneal Disorders Eye Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Cloudy cornea Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 3, 2025