IRAK-4 deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → IRAK-4 deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/irak-4-deficiency/ IRAK-4 deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description IRAK-4 deficiency is an inherited disorder of the immune system (primary immunodeficiency). This immunodeficiency leads to recurrent infections by a subset of bacteria known as pyogenic bacteria but not by other infectious agents. (Infection with pyogenic bacteria causes the production of pus.) The most common infections in IRAK-4 deficiency are caused by the Streptococcus pneumoniae , Staphylococcus aureus , and Pseudomonas aeruginosa bacteria. Most people with this condition have their first bacterial infection before age 2, and the infections can be life-threatening in infancy and childhood. Infections become less frequent with age. Most people with IRAK-4 deficiency have invasive bacterial infections, which can involve the blood (septicemia), the membrane covering the brain and spinal cord (meningitis), or the joints (leading to inflammation and arthritis). Invasive infections can also cause areas of tissue breakdown and pus production (abscesses) on internal organs. In addition, affected individuals can have localized infections of the upper respiratory tract , skin, or eyes. Although fever is a common reaction to bacterial infections, many people with IRAK-4 deficiency do not at first develop a high fever in response to these infections, even if the infection is severe. Frequency IRAK-4 deficiency is a very rare condition, although the exact prevalence is unknown. At least 49 individuals with this condition have been described in the scientific literature. Causes IRAK-4 deficiency is caused by mutations in the IRAK4 gene, which provides instructions for making a protein that plays an important role in stimulating the immune system to respond to infection. The IRAK-4 protein is part of a signaling pathway that is involved in early recognition of foreign invaders (pathogens) and the initiation of inflammation to fight infection. This signaling pathway is part of the innate immune response, which is the body's early, nonspecific response to pathogens. Mutations in the IRAK4 gene lead to the production of a nonfunctional protein or no protein at all.  The loss of functional IRAK-4 protein prevents the immune system from triggering inflammation in response to pathogens that would normally help fight the infections. Because the early immune response is insufficient, bacterial infections occur often and become severe and invasive. Learn more about the gene associated with IRAK-4 deficiency IRAK4 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 4 deficiency IRAK4 deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Immunodeficiency 67 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Immunodeficiency due to interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase-4 deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM IMMUNODEFICIENCY 67; IMD67 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Ku CL, von Bernuth H, Picard C, Zhang SY, Chang HH, Yang K, Chrabieh M,
Issekutz AC, Cunningham CK, Gallin J, Holland SM, Roifman C, Ehl S, Smart J, Tang
M, Barrat FJ, Levy O, McDonald D, Day-Good NK, Miller R, Takada H, Hara T,
Al-Hajjar S, Al-Ghonaium A, Speert D, Sanlaville D, Li X, Geissmann F, Vivier E,
Marodi L, Garty BZ, Chapel H, Rodriguez-Gallego C, Bossuyt X, Abel L, Puel A,
Casanova JL. Selective predisposition to bacterial infections in IRAK-4-deficient
children: IRAK-4-dependent TLRs are otherwise redundant in protective immunity. J
Exp Med. 2007 Oct 1;204(10):2407-22. doi: 10.1084/jem.20070628. Epub 2007 Sep 24. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Maglione PJ, Simchoni N, Black S, Radigan L, Overbey JR, Bagiella E, Bussel
JB, Bossuyt X, Casanova JL, Meyts I, Cerutti A, Picard C, Cunningham-Rundles C.
IRAK-4 and MyD88 deficiencies impair IgM responses against T-independent
bacterial antigens. Blood. 2014 Dec 4;124(24):3561-71. doi:
10.1182/blood-2014-07-587824. Epub 2014 Oct 15. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Medvedev AE, Lentschat A, Kuhns DB, Blanco JC, Salkowski C, Zhang S, Arditi M,
Gallin JI, Vogel SN. Distinct mutations in IRAK-4 confer hyporesponsiveness to
lipopolysaccharide and interleukin-1 in a patient with recurrent bacterial
infections. J Exp Med. 2003 Aug 18;198(4):521-31. doi: 10.1084/jem.20030701. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Picard C, Casanova JL, Puel A. Infectious diseases in patients with IRAK-4,
MyD88, NEMO, or IkappaBalpha deficiency. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2011 Jul;24(3):490-7. doi:
10.1128/CMR.00001-11. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Picard C, Puel A, Bonnet M, Ku CL, Bustamante J, Yang K, Soudais C, Dupuis S,
Feinberg J, Fieschi C, Elbim C, Hitchcock R, Lammas D, Davies G, Al-Ghonaium A,
Al-Rayes H, Al-Jumaah S, Al-Hajjar S, Al-Mohsen IZ, Frayha HH, Rucker R, Hawn TR,
Aderem A, Tufenkeji H, Haraguchi S, Day NK, Good RA, Gougerot-Pocidalo MA,
Ozinsky A, Casanova JL. Pyogenic bacterial infections in humans with IRAK-4
deficiency. Science. 2003 Mar 28;299(5615):2076-9. doi: 10.1126/science.1081902.
Epub 2003 Mar 13. Citation on PubMed Picard C, von Bernuth H, Ghandil P, Chrabieh M, Levy O, Arkwright PD, McDonald
D, Geha RS, Takada H, Krause JC, Creech CB, Ku CL, Ehl S, Marodi L, Al-Muhsen S,
Al-Hajjar S, Al-Ghonaium A, Day-Good NK, Holland SM, Gallin JI, Chapel H, Speert
DP, Rodriguez-Gallego C, Colino E, Garty BZ, Roifman C, Hara T, Yoshikawa H,
Nonoyama S, Domachowske J, Issekutz AC, Tang M, Smart J, Zitnik SE, Hoarau C,
Kumararatne DS, Thrasher AJ, Davies EG, Bethune C, Sirvent N, de Ricaud D,
Camcioglu Y, Vasconcelos J, Guedes M, Vitor AB, Rodrigo C, Almazan F, Mendez M,
Arostegui JI, Alsina L, Fortuny C, Reichenbach J, Verbsky JW, Bossuyt X,
Doffinger R, Abel L, Puel A, Casanova JL. Clinical features and outcome of
patients with IRAK-4 and MyD88 deficiency. Medicine (Baltimore). 2010
Nov;89(6):403-425. doi: 10.1097/MD.0b013e3181fd8ec3. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Immune System and Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Immune response Meningitis Septicemia Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 1, 2017