Familial HDL deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Familial HDL deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/familial-hdl-deficiency/ Familial HDL deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Familial HDL deficiency is a condition characterized by low levels of high-density lipoprotei% (HDL) in the blood. HDL is a molecule that transports cholesterol and certain fats called phospholipids through the bloodstream from the body's tissues to the liver. Once in the liver, cholesterol and phospholipids are redistributed to other tissues or removed from the body. HDL is often referred to as "good cholesterol" because high levels of this substance reduce the chances of developing heart and blood vessel (cardiovascular) disease. People with familial HDL deficiency may develop cardiovascular disease at a relatively young age, often before age 50. Severely reduced levels of HDL in the blood is a characteristic feature of a related disorder called Tangier disease . People with Tangier disease have additional signs and symptoms, such as disturbances in nerve function; enlarged, orange-colored tonsils; and clouding of the clear covering of the eye (corneal clouding). However, people with familial HDL deficiency do not have these additional features. Frequency Familial HDL deficiency is a rare disorder, although the prevalence is unknown. Causes Mutations in the ABCA1 gene or the APOA1 gene cause familial HDL deficiency. The proteins produced from these genes work together to remove cholesterol and phospholipids from cells. The ABCA1 gene provides instructions for making a protein that removes cholesterol and phospholipids from cells by moving them across the cell membrane. The movement of these substances across the membrane is enhanced by another protein called apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I), which is produced by the APOA1 gene. Once outside the cell, the cholesterol and phospholipids combine with apoA-I to form HDL. ApoA-I also triggers a reaction that converts cholesterol to a form that can be fully integrated into HDL and transported through the bloodstream. ABCA1 gene mutations and some APOA1 gene mutations prevent the release of cholesterol and phospholipids from cells. Other mutations in the APOA1 gene reduce the protein's ability to stimulate the conversion of cholesterol. These ABCA1 and APOA1 gene mutations decrease the amount of cholesterol or phospholipids available to form HDL, resulting in low levels of HDL in the blood. A shortage (deficiency) of HDL is believed to increase the risk of cardiovascular disease. Learn more about the genes associated with Familial HDL deficiency ABCA1 APOA1 Inheritance Familial HDL deficiency is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means an alteration in one copy of either the ABCA1 or the APOA1 gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. People with alterations in both copies of the ABCA1 gene develop the related disorder Tangier disease. Other Names for This Condition Familial hypoalphalipoproteinemia FHA HDL deficiency, type 2 HDLD Low serum HDL cholesterol Primary hypoalphalipoproteinemia Additional Information & Resources Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM HYPOALPHALIPOPROTEINEMIA, PRIMARY, 1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Batal R, Tremblay M, Krimbou L, Mamer O, Davignon J, Genest J Jr, Cohn JS.
Familial HDL deficiency characterized by hypercatabolism of mature apoA-I but not
proapoA-I. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 1998 Apr;18(4):655-64. doi:
10.1161/01.atv.18.4.655. Citation on PubMed Marcil M, Brooks-Wilson A, Clee SM, Roomp K, Zhang LH, Yu L, Collins JA, van
Dam M, Molhuizen HO, Loubster O, Ouellette BF, Sensen CW, Fichter K, Mott S,
Denis M, Boucher B, Pimstone S, Genest J Jr, Kastelein JJ, Hayden MR. Mutations
in the ABC1 gene in familial HDL deficiency with defective cholesterol efflux.
Lancet. 1999 Oct 16;354(9187):1341-6. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(99)07026-9. Citation on PubMed Mott S, Yu L, Marcil M, Boucher B, Rondeau C, Genest J Jr. Decreased cellular
cholesterol efflux is a common cause of familial hypoalphalipoproteinemia: role
of the ABCA1 gene mutations. Atherosclerosis. 2000 Oct;152(2):457-68. doi:
10.1016/s0021-9150(99)00498-0. Citation on PubMed Oram JF. HDL apolipoproteins and ABCA1: partners in the removal of excess
cellular cholesterol. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2003 May 1;23(5):720-7. doi:
10.1161/01.ATV.0000054662.44688.9A. Epub 2003 Jan 9. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Cholesterol Genetic Disorders Heart Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated November 1, 2012