MPV17-related hepatocerebral mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → MPV17-related hepatocerebral mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/mpv17-related-hepatocerebral-mitochondrial-dna-depletion-syndrome/ MPV17-related hepatocerebral mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description MPV17 -related hepatocerebral mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome is an inherited disorder that can cause liver disease and neurological problems. The signs and symptoms of this condition begin in infancy and typically include vomiting, diarrhea, and an inability to grow or gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive). Many affected infants have a buildup of a chemical called lactic acid in the body (lactic acidosis) and low blood glucose (hypoglycemia). Within the first weeks of life, infants develop liver disease that quickly progresses to liver failure. The liver is frequently enlarged (hepatomegaly) and liver cells often have a reduced ability to release a digestive fluid called bile (cholestasis). Rarely, affected children develop liver cancer . After the onset of liver disease, many affected infants develop neurological problems, which can include developmental delay, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and reduced sensation in the limbs (peripheral neuropathy). Individuals with MPV17 -related hepatocerebral mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome typically survive only into infancy or early childhood. MPV17 -related hepatocerebral mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome is most frequently seen in the Navajo population of the southwestern United States. In this population, the condition is known as Navajo neurohepatopathy. People with Navajo neurohepatopathy tend to have a longer life expectancy than those with MPV17 -related hepatocerebral mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome. In addition to the signs and symptoms described above, people with Navajo neurohepatopathy may have problems with sensing pain that can lead to painless bone fractures and self-mutilation of the fingers or toes. Individuals with Navajo neurohepatopathy may lack feeling in the clear front covering of the eye (corneal anesthesia), which can lead to open sores and scarring on the cornea, resulting in impaired vision. The cause of these additional features is unknown. Frequency MPV17 -related hepatocerebral mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome is thought to be a rare condition. Approximately 30 cases have been described in the scientific literature, including seven families with Navajo neurohepatopathy. Within the Navajo Nation of the southwestern United States, Navajo neurohepatopathy is estimated to occur in 1 in 1,600 newborns. Causes As the condition name suggests, mutations in the MPV17 gene cause MPV17 -related hepatocerebral mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome. The protein produced from the MPV17 gene is located in the inner membrane of cell structures called mitochondria . Mitochondria are involved in a wide variety of cellular activities, including energy production, chemical signaling, and regulation of cell growth, division, and death. Mitochondria contain their own DNA, known as mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), which is essential for the normal function of these structures. It is likely that the MPV17 protein is involved in the maintenance of mtDNA. Having an adequate amount of mtDNA is essential for normal energy production within cells. MPV17 gene mutations that cause MPV17 -related hepatocerebral mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome lead to production of a protein with impaired function. One mutation causes all cases of Navajo neurohepatopathy and results in the production of an unstable MPV17 protein that is quickly broken down. A dysfunctional or absent MPV17 protein leads to problems with the maintenance of mtDNA, which can cause a reduction in the amount of mtDNA (known as mitochondrial DNA depletion). Mitochondrial DNA depletion impairs mitochondrial function in many of the body's cells and tissues, particularly the brain, liver, and other tissues that have high energy requirements. Reduced mitochondrial function in the liver and brain lead to the liver failure and neurological dysfunction associated with MPV17 -related hepatocerebral mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome. Researchers suggest that the less mtDNA that is available in cells, the more severe the features of Navajo neurohepatopathy. Learn more about the gene associated with MPV17-related hepatocerebral mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome MPV17 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome 6 MPV17-associated hepatocerebral MDS MTDPS6 Navajo familial neurogenic arthropathy Navajo neurohepatopathy Navajo neuropathy NNH Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome 6 (hepatocerebral type) Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Navajo neurohepatopathy Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MITOCHONDRIAL DNA DEPLETION SYNDROME 6 (HEPATOCEREBRAL TYPE); MTDPS6 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References El-Hattab AW, Li FY, Schmitt E, Zhang S, Craigen WJ, Wong LJ. MPV17-associated
hepatocerebral mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome: new patients and novel
mutations. Mol Genet Metab. 2010 Mar;99(3):300-8. doi:
10.1016/j.ymgme.2009.10.003. Epub 2009 Oct 13. Citation on PubMed Karadimas CL, Vu TH, Holve SA, Chronopoulou P, Quinzii C, Johnsen SD, Kurth J,
Eggers E, Palenzuela L, Tanji K, Bonilla E, De Vivo DC, DiMauro S, Hirano M.
Navajo neurohepatopathy is caused by a mutation in the MPV17 gene. Am J Hum
Genet. 2006 Sep;79(3):544-8. doi: 10.1086/506913. Epub 2006 Jun 28. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Spinazzola A, Santer R, Akman OH, Tsiakas K, Schaefer H, Ding X, Karadimas CL,
Shanske S, Ganesh J, Di Mauro S, Zeviani M. Hepatocerebral form of mitochondrial
DNA depletion syndrome: novel MPV17 mutations. Arch Neurol. 2008
Aug;65(8):1108-13. doi: 10.1001/archneur.65.8.1108. Citation on PubMed Spinazzola A, Viscomi C, Fernandez-Vizarra E, Carrara F, D'Adamo P, Calvo S,
Marsano RM, Donnini C, Weiher H, Strisciuglio P, Parini R, Sarzi E, Chan A,
DiMauro S, Rotig A, Gasparini P, Ferrero I, Mootha VK, Tiranti V, Zeviani M.
MPV17 encodes an inner mitochondrial membrane protein and is mutated in infantile
hepatic mitochondrial DNA depletion. Nat Genet. 2006 May;38(5):570-5. doi:
10.1038/ng1765. Epub 2006 Apr 2. Citation on PubMed Wong LJ, Brunetti-Pierri N, Zhang Q, Yazigi N, Bove KE, Dahms BB, Puchowicz
MA, Gonzalez-Gomez I, Schmitt ES, Truong CK, Hoppel CL, Chou PC, Wang J, Baldwin
EE, Adams D, Leslie N, Boles RG, Kerr DS, Craigen WJ. Mutations in the MPV17 gene
are responsible for rapidly progressive liver failure in infancy. Hepatology.
2007 Oct;46(4):1218-27. doi: 10.1002/hep.21799. Erratum In: Hepatology. 2008
Feb;47(2):768. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Liver Diseases Mitochondrial Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated January 1, 2013