Hyperlysinemia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Hyperlysinemia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/hyperlysinemia/ Hyperlysinemia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Hyperlysinemia is an inherited condition characterized by elevated blood levels of the amino acid lysine, a building block of most proteins.  Hyperlysinemia is caused by the shortage (deficiency) of the enzyme that breaks down lysine.  Hyperlysinemia typically causes no health problems, and most people with elevated lysine levels are unaware that they have this condition.  Rarely, people with hyperlysinemia have intellectual disability or behavioral problems.  It is not clear whether these problems are due to hyperlysinemia or another cause. Frequency The incidence of hyperlysinemia is unknown. Causes Mutations in the AASS gene cause hyperlysinemia.  The AASS gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called aminoadipic semialdehyde synthase.  This enzyme performs two functions in the breakdown of lysine.  First, the enzyme breaks down lysine to a molecule called saccharopine.  It then breaks down saccharopine to a molecule called alpha-aminoadipate semialdehyde. Mutations in the AASS gene that impair the breakdown of lysine result in elevated levels of lysine in the blood and urine.  These increased levels of lysine do not appear to have any negative effects on the body. When mutations in the AASS gene impair the breakdown of saccharopine, this molecule builds up in blood and urine.  This buildup is sometimes referred to as saccharopinuria, which is considered to be a variant of hyperlysinemia.  It is unclear if saccharopinuria causes any symptoms. Learn more about the gene associated with Hyperlysinemia AASS Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Alpha-aminoadipic semialdehyde deficiency disease Familial hyperlysinemia Lysine alpha-ketoglutarate reductase deficiency disease Saccharopine dehydrogenase deficiency disease Saccharopinuria Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Hyperlysinemia Genetic Testing Registry: Saccharopinuria Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Hyperlysinemia Saccharopinuria Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM SACCHAROPINURIA HYPERLYSINEMIA, TYPE I Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Markovitz PJ, Chuang DT, Cox RP. Familial hyperlysinemias. Purification and
characterization of the bifunctional aminoadipic semialdehyde synthase with
lysine-ketoglutarate reductase and saccharopine dehydrogenase activities. J Biol
Chem. 1984 Oct 10;259(19):11643-6. Citation on PubMed Sacksteder KA, Biery BJ, Morrell JC, Goodman BK, Geisbrecht BV, Cox RP, Gould
SJ, Geraghty MT. Identification of the alpha-aminoadipic semialdehyde synthase
gene, which is defective in familial hyperlysinemia. Am J Hum Genet. 2000
Jun;66(6):1736-43. doi: 10.1086/302919. Epub 2000 Apr 20. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Saudubray JM, Rabier D. Biomarkers identified in inborn errors for lysine,
arginine, and ornithine. J Nutr. 2007 Jun;137(6 Suppl 2):1669S-1672S. doi:
10.1093/jn/137.6.1669S. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Amino Acid Metabolism Disorders Genetic Disorders Newborn Screening MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2009