Juvenile Paget disease: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Juvenile Paget disease URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/juvenile-paget-disease/ Juvenile Paget disease To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Juvenile Paget disease is a disorder that affects bone growth. This disease causes bones to be abnormally large, misshapen, and easily broken (fractured). The signs of juvenile Paget disease appear in infancy or early childhood. As bones grow, they become progressively weaker and more deformed. These abnormalities usually become more severe during the adolescent growth spurt, when bones grow very quickly. Juvenile Paget disease affects the entire skeleton, resulting in widespread bone and joint pain. The bones of the skull tend to grow unusually large and thick, which can lead to hearing loss. The disease also affects bones of the spine ( vertebrae ). The deformed vertebrae can collapse, leading to abnormal curvature of the spine . Additionally, weight-bearing long bones in the legs tend to bow and fracture easily, which can interfere with standing and walking. Frequency Juvenile Paget disease is rare; about 50 affected individuals have been identified worldwide. Causes Juvenile Paget disease is caused by mutations in the TNFRSF11B gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is involved in bone remodeling, a normal process in which old bone is broken down and new bone is created to replace it. Bones are constantly being remodeled, and the process is carefully controlled to ensure that bones stay strong and healthy. Mutations in the TNFRSF11B gene lead to a much faster rate of bone remodeling starting early in life. Bone tissue is broken down more quickly than usual, and when new bone tissue grows it is larger, weaker, and less organized than normal bone. This abnormally fast bone remodeling underlies the problems with bone growth characteristic of juvenile Paget disease. Learn more about the gene associated with Juvenile Paget disease TNFRSF11B Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Chronic congenital idiopathic hyperphosphatasemia Familial idiopathic hyperphosphatasemia Familial osteoectasia Hyperostosis corticalis deformans juvenilis Hyperphosphatasemia with bone disease Hyperphosphatasia, familial idiopathic Idiopathic hyperphosphatasia JPD Juvenile Paget's disease Osteochalasia desmalis familiaris Osteoectasia with hyperphosphatasia Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Hyperphosphatasemia with bone disease Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Juvenile Paget disease Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PAGET DISEASE OF BONE 5, JUVENILE-ONSET; PDB5 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Chong B, Hegde M, Fawkner M, Simonet S, Cassinelli H, Coker M, Kanis J, Seidel
J, Tau C, Tuysuz B, Yuksel B, Love D; International Hyperphosphatasia
Collaborative Group. Idiopathic hyperphosphatasia and TNFRSF11B mutations:
relationships between phenotype and genotype. J Bone Miner Res. 2003
Dec;18(12):2095-104. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.2003.18.12.2095. Citation on PubMed Cundy T, Hegde M, Naot D, Chong B, King A, Wallace R, Mulley J, Love DR,
Seidel J, Fawkner M, Banovic T, Callon KE, Grey AB, Reid IR, Middleton-Hardie CA,
Cornish J. A mutation in the gene TNFRSF11B encoding osteoprotegerin causes an
idiopathic hyperphosphatasia phenotype. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Sep 1;11(18):2119-27.
doi: 10.1093/hmg/11.18.2119. Citation on PubMed Cundy T. Idiopathic hyperphosphatasia. Semin Musculoskelet Radiol. 2002
Dec;6(4):307-12. doi: 10.1055/s-2002-36729. Citation on PubMed Daroszewska A, Ralston SH. Mechanisms of disease: genetics of Paget's disease
of bone and related disorders. Nat Clin Pract Rheumatol. 2006 May;2(5):270-7.
doi: 10.1038/ncprheum0172. Citation on PubMed Janssens K, de Vernejoul MC, de Freitas F, Vanhoenacker F, Van Hul W. An
intermediate form of juvenile Paget's disease caused by a truncating TNFRSF11B
mutation. Bone. 2005 Mar;36(3):542-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2004.12.004. Citation on PubMed Lucas GJ, Daroszewska A, Ralston SH. Contribution of genetic factors to the
pathogenesis of Paget's disease of bone and related disorders. J Bone Miner Res.
2006 Dec;21 Suppl 2:P31-7. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.06s206. Citation on PubMed Ralston SH. Juvenile Paget's disease, familial expansile osteolysis and other
genetic osteolytic disorders. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2008
Mar;22(1):101-11. doi: 10.1016/j.berh.2007.11.005. Citation on PubMed Whyte MP, Obrecht SE, Finnegan PM, Jones JL, Podgornik MN, McAlister WH, Mumm
S. Osteoprotegerin deficiency and juvenile Paget's disease. N Engl J Med. 2002
Jul 18;347(3):175-84. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa013096. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Bone Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2010