Prolidase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Prolidase deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/prolidase-deficiency/ Prolidase deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Prolidase deficiency is a disorder that causes a wide variety of symptoms. The disorder typically becomes apparent during infancy. Affected individuals may have enlargement of the spleen (splenomegaly); in some cases, both the spleen and liver are enlarged (hepatosplenomegaly). Diarrhea, vomiting, and dehydration may also occur. People with prolidase deficiency are susceptible to severe infections of the skin or ears, or potentially life-threatening respiratory tract infections. Some individuals with prolidase deficiency have chronic lung disease. Characteristic facial features in people with prolidase deficiency include prominent eyes that are widely spaced (hypertelorism), a high forehead, a flat bridge of the nose, and a very small lower jaw and chin (micrognathia). Affected children may experience delayed development, and about 75 percent of people with prolidase deficiency have intellectual disability that may range from mild to severe. People with prolidase deficiency often develop skin lesions, especially on their hands, feet, lower legs, and face. The severity of the skin involvement, which usually begins during childhood, may range from a mild rash to severe skin ulcers. Skin ulcers , especially on the legs, may not heal completely, resulting in complications including infection and amputation. The severity of symptoms in prolidase deficiency varies greatly among affected individuals. Some people with this disorder do not have any symptoms. In these individuals the condition can be detected by laboratory tests such as newborn screening tests or tests offered to relatives of affected individuals. Frequency Prolidase deficiency is a rare disorder. Approximately 70 individuals with this disorder have been documented in the medical literature, and researchers have estimated that the condition occurs in approximately 1 in 1 million to 1 in 2 million newborns. It is more common in certain areas in northern Israel, both among members of a religious minority called the Druze and in nearby Arab Moslem populations. Causes Prolidase deficiency is caused by mutations in the PEPD gene. This gene provides instructions for making the enzyme prolidase, also called peptidase D. Prolidase helps divide certain dipeptides, which are molecules composed of two protein building blocks ( amino acids ). Specifically, prolidase divides dipeptides containing the amino acids proline or hydroxyproline. By freeing these amino acids, prolidase helps make them available for use in producing proteins that the body needs. Prolidase is also involved in the final step of the breakdown of some proteins obtained through the diet and proteins that are no longer needed in the body. Prolidase is particularly important in the breakdown of collagens, a family of proteins that are rich in proline and hydroxyproline. Collagens are an important part of the extracellular matrix, which is the lattice of proteins and other molecules outside the cell. The extracellular matrix strengthens and supports connective tissues , such as skin, bone, cartilage, tendons, and ligaments. Collagen breakdown occurs during the maintenance (remodeling) of the extracellular matrix. PEPD gene mutations that cause prolidase deficiency result in the loss of prolidase enzyme activity. It is not well understood how the absence of prolidase activity causes the various signs and symptoms of prolidase deficiency. Researchers have suggested that accumulation of dipeptides that have not been broken down may lead to cell death. When cells die, their contents are released into the surrounding tissue, which could cause inflammation and lead to the skin problems seen in prolidase deficiency. Impaired collagen breakdown during remodeling of the extracellular matrix may also contribute to the skin problems. The intellectual disability that occurs in prolidase deficiency might result from problems in processing neuropeptides, which are brain signaling proteins that are rich in proline. It is unclear how absence of prolidase activity results in the other features of prolidase deficiency. Learn more about the gene associated with Prolidase deficiency PEPD Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Hyperimidodipeptiduria Imidodipeptidase deficiency PD Peptidase deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Prolidase deficiency Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Prolidase deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM PROLIDASE DEFICIENCY Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Falik-Zaccai TC, Khayat M, Luder A, Frenkel P, Magen D, Brik R,
Gershoni-Baruch R, Mandel H. A broad spectrum of developmental delay in a large
cohort of prolidase deficiency patients demonstrates marked interfamilial and
intrafamilial phenotypic variability. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2010
Jan 5;153B(1):46-56. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.b.30945. Citation on PubMed Forlino A, Lupi A, Vaghi P, Icaro Cornaglia A, Calligaro A, Campari E, Cetta
G. Mutation analysis of five new patients affected by prolidase deficiency: the
lack of enzyme activity causes necrosis-like cell death in cultured fibroblasts.
Hum Genet. 2002 Oct;111(4-5):314-22. doi: 10.1007/s00439-002-0792-5. Epub 2002
Aug 14. Citation on PubMed Luder AS, Mandel H, Khayat M, Gurevich I, Frankel P, Rivlin J, Falik-Zaccai
TC. Chronic lung disease and cystic fibrosis phenotype in prolidase deficiency: a
newly recognized association. J Pediatr. 2007 Jun;150(6):656-8, 658.e1. doi:
10.1016/j.jpeds.2007.03.025. Citation on PubMed Lupi A, De Riso A, Torre SD, Rossi A, Campari E, Vilarinho L, Cetta G, Forlino
A. Characterization of a new PEPD allele causing prolidase deficiency in two
unrelated patients: natural-occurrent mutations as a tool to investigate
structure-function relationship. J Hum Genet. 2004;49(9):500-506. doi:
10.1007/s10038-004-0180-1. Epub 2004 Aug 11. Citation on PubMed Lupi A, Rossi A, Campari E, Pecora F, Lund AM, Elcioglu NH, Gultepe M, Di
Rocco M, Cetta G, Forlino A. Molecular characterisation of six patients with
prolidase deficiency: identification of the first small duplication in the
prolidase gene and of a mutation generating symptomatic and asymptomatic outcomes
within the same family. J Med Genet. 2006 Dec;43(12):e58. doi:
10.1136/jmg.2006.043315. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Lupi A, Tenni R, Rossi A, Cetta G, Forlino A. Human prolidase and prolidase
deficiency: an overview on the characterization of the enzyme involved in proline
recycling and on the effects of its mutations. Amino Acids. 2008
Nov;35(4):739-52. doi: 10.1007/s00726-008-0055-4. Epub 2008 Mar 14. Citation on PubMed Mitsubuchi H, Nakamura K, Matsumoto S, Endo F. Inborn errors of proline
metabolism. J Nutr. 2008 Oct;138(10):2016S-2020S. doi: 10.1093/jn/138.10.2016S. Citation on PubMed Wang H, Kurien BT, Lundgren D, Patel NC, Kaufman KM, Miller DL, Porter AC,
D'Souza A, Nye L, Tumbush J, Hupertz V, Kerr DS, Kurono S, Matsumoto H, Scofield
RH. A nonsense mutation of PEPD in four Amish children with prolidase deficiency.
Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Mar 15;140(6):580-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31134. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Amino Acid Metabolism Disorders Genetic Brain Disorders Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Enlarged liver Genetics Splenomegaly Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated February 1, 2012