Weyers acrofacial dysostosis: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Weyers acrofacial dysostosis URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/weyers-acrofacial-dysostosis/ Weyers acrofacial dysostosis To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Weyers acrofacial dysostosis is a disorder that affects the development of the teeth, nails, and bones. Dental abnormalities can include small, peg-shaped teeth; fewer teeth than normal (hypodontia); and one front tooth instead of two (a single central incisor ). Additionally, the lower jaw (mandible) may be abnormally shaped. People with Weyers acrofacial dysostosis have abnormally small or malformed fingernails and toenails. Most people with the condition are relatively short, and they may have extra fingers or toes ( polydactyly ). The features of Weyers acrofacial dysostosis overlap with those of another, more severe condition called Ellis-van Creveld syndrome . In addition to tooth and nail abnormalities, people with Ellis-van Creveld syndrome have very short stature and are often born with heart defects. The two conditions are caused by mutations in the same genes. Frequency Weyers acrofacial dysostosis appears to be a rare disorder. Only a few affected families have been identified worldwide. Causes Most cases of Weyers acrofacial dysostosis result from mutations in the EVC2 gene. A mutation in a similar gene, EVC , has been found in at least one person with the characteristic features of the disorder. Little is known about the function of the EVC and EVC2 genes, although they appear to play important roles in cell-to-cell signaling during development. In particular, the proteins produced from these genes  are thought to help regulate the Sonic Hedgehog signaling pathway. This pathway plays roles in cell growth, cell specialization, and the normal shaping (patterning) of many parts of the body. The mutations that cause Weyers acrofacial dysostosis result in the production of an abnormal EVC or EVC2 protein. It is unclear how the abnormal proteins lead to the specific signs and symptoms of this condition. Studies suggest that they interfere with Sonic Hedgehog signaling in the developing embryo, disrupting the formation and growth of the teeth, nails, and bones. Learn more about the genes associated with Weyers acrofacial dysostosis EVC EVC2 Inheritance Weyers acrofacial dysostosis is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered EVC or EVC2 gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person inherits the altered gene from a parent who has the condition. Other Names for This Condition Acrodental dysostosis of Weyers Curry-Hall syndrome Weyers acrodental dysostosis Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Curry-Hall syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Acrofacial dysostosis, Weyers type Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM WEYERS ACROFACIAL DYSOSTOSIS; WAD Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Howard TD, Guttmacher AE, McKinnon W, Sharma M, McKusick VA, Jabs EW.
Autosomal dominant postaxial polydactyly, nail dystrophy, and dental
abnormalities map to chromosome 4p16, in the region containing the Ellis-van
Creveld syndrome locus. Am J Hum Genet. 1997 Dec;61(6):1405-12. doi:
10.1086/301643. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Ruiz-Perez VL, Goodship JA. Ellis-van Creveld syndrome and Weyers acrodental
dysostosis are caused by cilia-mediated diminished response to hedgehog ligands.
Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2009 Nov 15;151C(4):341-51. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.30226. Citation on PubMed Ruiz-Perez VL, Ide SE, Strom TM, Lorenz B, Wilson D, Woods K, King L,
Francomano C, Freisinger P, Spranger S, Marino B, Dallapiccola B, Wright M,
Meitinger T, Polymeropoulos MH, Goodship J. Mutations in a new gene in Ellis-van
Creveld syndrome and Weyers acrodental dysostosis. Nat Genet. 2000
Mar;24(3):283-6. doi: 10.1038/73508. Erratum In: Nat Genet 2000 May;25(1):125. Citation on PubMed Valencia M, Lapunzina P, Lim D, Zannolli R, Bartholdi D, Wollnik B, Al-Ajlouni
O, Eid SS, Cox H, Buoni S, Hayek J, Martinez-Frias ML, Antonio PA, Temtamy S,
Aglan M, Goodship JA, Ruiz-Perez VL. Widening the mutation spectrum of EVC and
EVC2: ectopic expression of Weyer variants in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts disrupts
Hedgehog signaling. Hum Mutat. 2009 Dec;30(12):1667-75. doi: 10.1002/humu.21117. Citation on PubMed Ye X, Song G, Fan M, Shi L, Jabs EW, Huang S, Guo R, Bian Z. A novel
heterozygous deletion in the EVC2 gene causes Weyers acrofacial dysostosis. Hum
Genet. 2006 Mar;119(1-2):199-205. doi: 10.1007/s00439-005-0129-2. Epub 2006 Jan
11. Citation on PubMed Zannolli R, Buoni S, Viviano M, Macucci F, D'Ambrosio A, Livi W, Mazzei MA,
Mazzei F, Sacco P, Volterrani L, Vonella G, Orsi A, Zappella M, Hayek J.
Polydactyly with ectodermal defect, osteopenia, and mental delay. J Child Neurol.
2008 Jun;23(6):683-9. doi: 10.1177/0883073807309778. Epub 2008 Jan 8. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Bone Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Nail abnormalities Polydactyly Tooth - abnormal shape Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated December 1, 2012