Leukoencephalopathy with brainstem and spinal cord involvement and lactate elevation: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Leukoencephalopathy with brainstem and spinal cord involvement and lactate elevation URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/leukoencephalopathy-with-brainstem-and-spinal-cord-involvement-and-lactate-elevation/ Leukoencephalopathy with brainstem and spinal cord involvement and lactate elevation To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Leukoencephalopathy with brainstem and spinal cord involvement and lactate elevation (commonly referred to as LBSL) is a progressive disorder that affects the brain and spinal cord. Leukoencephalopathy refers to abnormalities in the white matter of the brain, which is tissue containing nerve cell fibers ( axons ) that transmit nerve impulses. Most affected individuals begin to develop movement problems during childhood or adolescence. However, in some individuals, these problems do not develop until adulthood. People with LBSL have abnormal muscle stiffness (spasticity) and difficulty with coordinating movements (ataxia). In addition, affected individuals lose the ability to sense the position of their limbs or vibrations with their limbs. These movement and sensation problems affect the legs more than the arms, making walking difficult. Most affected individuals eventually require wheelchair assistance, sometimes as early as their teens, although the age varies. People with LBSL can have other signs and symptoms of the condition. Some affected individuals develop recurrent seizures (epilepsy), speech difficulties (dysarthria), learning problems, or mild deterioration of mental functioning. Some people with this disorder are particularly vulnerable to severe complications following minor head trauma, which may trigger a loss of consciousness, other reversible neurological problems, or fever. Distinct changes in the brains of people with LBSL can be seen using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). These characteristic abnormalities typically involve particular parts of the white matter of the brain and specific regions (called tracts) within the brainstem and spinal cord, especially the pyramidal tract and the dorsal column. In addition, most affected individuals have a high level of a substance called lactate in the white matter of the brain, which is identified using another test called magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS). Frequency LBSL is a rare condition. Its exact prevalence is not known. Causes LBSL is caused by mutations in the DARS2 gene, which provides instructions for making an enzyme called mitochondrial aspartyl-tRNA synthetase. This enzyme is important in the production (synthesis) of proteins in cellular structures called mitochondria , the energy-producing centers in cells. While most protein synthesis occurs in the fluid surrounding the nucleus ( cytoplasm ), some proteins are synthesized in the mitochondria. During protein synthesis, in either the mitochondria or the cytoplasm, building blocks ( amino acids ) are connected together in a specific order, creating a chain of amino acids that forms the protein. Mitochondrial aspartyl-tRNA synthetase plays a role in adding the amino acid aspartic acid at the proper place in mitochondrial proteins. Mutations in the DARS2 gene result in decreased mitochondrial aspartyl-tRNA synthetase enzyme activity, which hinders the addition of aspartic acid to mitochondrial proteins. It is unclear how the gene mutations lead to the signs and symptoms of LBSL. Researchers do not understand why reduced activity of mitochondrial aspartyl-tRNA synthetase specifically affects certain parts of the brain and spinal cord. Learn more about the gene associated with Leukoencephalopathy with brainstem and spinal cord involvement and lactate elevation DARS2 Inheritance LBSL is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. In this condition, each copy of the gene carries a different mutation (compound heterozygous mutations). An affected individual never has the same mutation in both copies of the gene (a homozygous mutation). The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition LBSL Mitochondrial aspartyl-tRNA synthetase deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Leukoencephalopathy with brain stem and spinal cord involvement-high lactate syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Leukoencephalopathy with brain stem and spinal cord involvement-high lactate syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM LEUKOENCEPHALOPATHY WITH BRAINSTEM AND SPINAL CORD INVOLVEMENT AND LACTATE ELEVATION; LBSL Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Engelen M, Abbink TEM, Salomons GS, van der Knaap MS. Leukoencephalopathy with
Brain Stem and Spinal Cord Involvement and Lactate Elevation. 2010 May 25
[updated 2021 Feb 18]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE,
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University
of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK43417/ Citation on PubMed Lin J, Chiconelli Faria E, Da Rocha AJ, Rodrigues Masruha M, Pereira Vilanova
LC, Scheper GC, Van der Knaap MS. Leukoencephalopathy with brainstem and spinal
cord involvement and normal lactate: a new mutation in the DARS2 gene. J Child
Neurol. 2010 Nov;25(11):1425-8. doi: 10.1177/0883073810370897. Epub 2010 May 25. Citation on PubMed Scheper GC, van der Klok T, van Andel RJ, van Berkel CG, Sissler M, Smet J,
Muravina TI, Serkov SV, Uziel G, Bugiani M, Schiffmann R, Krageloh-Mann I,
Smeitink JA, Florentz C, Van Coster R, Pronk JC, van der Knaap MS. Mitochondrial
aspartyl-tRNA synthetase deficiency causes leukoencephalopathy with brain stem
and spinal cord involvement and lactate elevation. Nat Genet. 2007
Apr;39(4):534-9. doi: 10.1038/ng2013. Epub 2007 Mar 25. Citation on PubMed Uluc K, Baskan O, Yildirim KA, Ozsahin S, Koseoglu M, Isak B, Scheper GC,
Gunal DI, van der Knaap MS. Leukoencephalopathy with brain stem and spinal cord
involvement and high lactate: a genetically proven case with distinct MRI
findings. J Neurol Sci. 2008 Oct 15;273(1-2):118-22. doi:
10.1016/j.jns.2008.06.002. Epub 2008 Jul 10. Citation on PubMed van der Knaap MS, van der Voorn P, Barkhof F, Van Coster R, Krageloh-Mann I,
Feigenbaum A, Blaser S, Vles JS, Rieckmann P, Pouwels PJ. A new
leukoencephalopathy with brainstem and spinal cord involvement and high lactate.
Ann Neurol. 2003 Feb;53(2):252-8. doi: 10.1002/ana.10456. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Brain Disorders Genetic Disorders Movement Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Head MRI Movement - uncoordinated Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2011