Langer mesomelic dysplasia: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Langer mesomelic dysplasia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/langer-mesomelic-dysplasia/ Langer mesomelic dysplasia To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Langer mesomelic dysplasia is a disorder of bone growth. Affected individuals typically have extreme shortening of the long bones in the arms and legs (mesomelia). As a result of the shortened leg bones, people with Langer mesomelic dysplasia have very short stature. A bone in the forearm called the ulna and a bone in the lower leg called the fibula are often underdeveloped or absent, while other bones in the forearm ( the radius ) and lower leg (the tibia) are unusually short, thick, and curved. Some people with Langer mesomelic dysplasia also have an abnormality of the wrist and forearm bones called Madelung deformity, which may cause pain and limit wrist movement. Additionally, some affected individuals have mild underdevelopment of the lower jaw bone (mandible). Frequency The prevalence of Langer mesomelic dysplasia is unknown, although the condition appears to be rare. Several dozen affected individuals have been reported in the scientific literature. Causes Langer mesomelic dysplasia results from changes involving the SHOX gene. The protein produced from this gene plays a role in bone development and is particularly important for the growth and maturation of bones in the arms and legs. The most common cause of Langer mesomelic dysplasia is a deletion of the entire SHOX gene. Other genetic changes that can cause the disorder include mutations in the SHOX gene or deletions of nearby genetic material that normally helps regulate the gene's activity. These changes greatly reduce or eliminate the amount of SHOX protein that is produced. A lack of this protein disrupts normal bone development and growth, which underlies the severe skeletal abnormalities associated with Langer mesomelic dysplasia. Learn more about the gene associated with Langer mesomelic dysplasia SHOX Inheritance Langer mesomelic dysplasia has a pseudoautosomal recessive pattern of inheritance.  The SHOX gene is located on both the X and Y chromosomes ( sex chromosomes ) in an area known as the pseudoautosomal region. Although many genes are unique to either the X or Y chromosome, genes in the pseudoautosomal region are present on both sex chromosomes. As a result, both females (who have two X chromosomes) and males (who have one X and one Y chromosome) normally have two functional copies of the SHOX gene in each cell. The inheritance pattern of Langer mesomelic dysplasia is described as recessive because both copies of the SHOX gene in each cell must be missing or altered to cause the disorder. In females, the condition results when the gene is missing or altered on both copies of the X chromosome; in males, it results when the gene is missing or altered on the X chromosome and the Y chromosome. A related skeletal disorder called Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis occurs when one copy of the SHOX gene is mutated in each cell. This disorder has signs and symptoms that are similar to, but typically less severe than, those of Langer mesomelic dysplasia. Other Names for This Condition Dyschondrosteosis homozygous Langer mesomelic dwarfism LMD Mesomelic dwarfism of the hypoplastic ulna, fibula, and mandible type Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Langer mesomelic dysplasia syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Langer mesomelic dysplasia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM LANGER MESOMELIC DYSPLASIA; LMD Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bertorelli R, Capone L, Ambrosetti F, Garavelli L, Varriale L, Mazza V,
Stanghellini I, Percesepe A, Forabosco A. The homozygous deletion of the 3'
enhancer of the SHOX gene causes Langer mesomelic dysplasia. Clin Genet. 2007
Nov;72(5):490-1. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2007.00875.x. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Campos-Barros A, Benito-Sanz S, Ross JL, Zinn AR, Heath KE. Compound
heterozygosity of SHOX-encompassing and downstream PAR1 deletions results in
Langer mesomelic dysplasia (LMD). Am J Med Genet A. 2007 May 1;143A(9):933-8.
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31676. Citation on PubMed Shears DJ, Guillen-Navarro E, Sempere-Miralles M, Domingo-Jimenez R, Scambler
PJ, Winter RM. Pseudodominant inheritance of Langer mesomelic dysplasia caused by
a SHOX homeobox missense mutation. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Jun 15;110(2):153-7. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.10421. Citation on PubMed Thomas NS, Maloney V, Bass P, Mulik V, Wellesley D, Castle B. SHOX mutations
in a family and a fetus with Langer mesomelic dwarfism. Am J Med Genet A. 2004
Jul 15;128A(2):179-84. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30095. Citation on PubMed Zinn AR, Wei F, Zhang L, Elder FF, Scott CI Jr, Marttila P, Ross JL. Complete
SHOX deficiency causes Langer mesomelic dysplasia. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Jun
15;110(2):158-63. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.10422. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Bone Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated January 1, 2012