Hypochromic microcytic anemia with iron overload: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Hypochromic microcytic anemia with iron overload URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/hypochromic-microcytic-anemia-with-iron-overload/ Hypochromic microcytic anemia with iron overload To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Hypochromic microcytic anemia with iron overload is a condition that impairs the normal transport of iron in cells. Iron is an essential component of hemoglobin , which is the substance that red blood cells use to carry oxygen to cells and tissues throughout the body. In this condition, red blood cells cannot access iron in the blood, so there is a decrease of red blood cell production (anemia) that is apparent at birth. The red blood cells that are produced are abnormally small (microcytic) and pale (hypochromic). Hypochromic microcytic anemia with iron overload can lead to pale skin (pallor), tiredness (fatigue), and slow growth. In hypochromic microcytic anemia with iron overload, the iron that is not used by red blood cells accumulates in the liver, which can impair its function over time. The liver problems typically become apparent in adolescence or early adulthood. Frequency Hypochromic microcytic anemia with iron overload is likely a rare disorder; at least five affected families have been reported in the scientific literature. Causes Mutations in the SLC11A2 gene cause hypochromic microcytic anemia with iron overload. The SLC11A2 gene provides instructions for making a protein called divalent metal transporter 1 (DMT1). The DMT1 protein is found in all tissues, where its primary role is to transport positively charged iron atoms (ions) within cells. In a section of the small intestine called the duodenum, the DMT1 protein is located within finger-like projections called microvilli . These projections absorb nutrients from food as it passes through the intestine and then release them into the bloodstream. In all other cells, including immature red blood cells called erythroblasts, DMT1 is located in the membrane of endosomes, which are specialized compartments that are formed at the cell surface to carry proteins and other molecules to their destinations within the cell. DMT1 transports iron from the endosomes to the cytoplasm so it can be used by the cell. SLC11A2 gene mutations lead to reduced production of the DMT1 protein, decreased protein function, or impaired ability of the protein to get to the correct location in cells. In erythroblasts, a shortage of DMT1 protein diminishes the amount of iron transported within cells to attach to hemoglobin . As a result, the development of healthy red blood cells is impaired, leading to a shortage of these cells. In the duodenum, a shortage of DMT1 protein decreases iron absorption. To compensate, cells increase production of functional DMT1 protein, which increases iron absorption. Because the red blood cells cannot use the iron that is absorbed, it accumulates in the liver, eventually impairing liver function. The lack of involvement of other tissues in hypochromic microcytic anemia with iron overload is likely because these tissues have other ways to transport iron. Learn more about the gene associated with Hypochromic microcytic anemia with iron overload SLC11A2 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Microcytic anemia and hepatic iron overload Microcytic anemia with liver iron overload Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Microcytic anemia with liver iron overload Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Microcytic anemia with liver iron overload Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM ANEMIA, HYPOCHROMIC MICROCYTIC, WITH IRON OVERLOAD 1; AHMIO1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bardou-Jacquet E, Island ML, Jouanolle AM, Detivaud L, Fatih N, Ropert M,
Brissot E, Mosser A, Maisonneuve H, Brissot P, Loreal O. A novel N491S mutation
in the human SLC11A2 gene impairs protein trafficking and in association with the
G212V mutation leads to microcytic anemia and liver iron overload. Blood Cells
Mol Dis. 2011 Dec 15;47(4):243-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2011.07.004. Epub 2011 Aug
26. Citation on PubMed Beaumont C, Delaunay J, Hetet G, Grandchamp B, de Montalembert M, Tchernia G.
Two new human DMT1 gene mutations in a patient with microcytic anemia, low
ferritinemia, and liver iron overload. Blood. 2006 May 15;107(10):4168-70. doi:
10.1182/blood-2005-10-4269. Epub 2006 Jan 26. Citation on PubMed Iolascon A, d'Apolito M, Servedio V, Cimmino F, Piga A, Camaschella C.
Microcytic anemia and hepatic iron overload in a child with compound heterozygous
mutations in DMT1 (SCL11A2). Blood. 2006 Jan 1;107(1):349-54. doi:
10.1182/blood-2005-06-2477. Epub 2005 Sep 13. Citation on PubMed Iolascon A, De Falco L. Mutations in the gene encoding DMT1: clinical
presentation and treatment. Semin Hematol. 2009 Oct;46(4):358-70. doi:
10.1053/j.seminhematol.2009.06.005. Citation on PubMed Lam-Yuk-Tseung S, Camaschella C, Iolascon A, Gros P. A novel R416C mutation in
human DMT1 (SLC11A2) displays pleiotropic effects on function and causes
microcytic anemia and hepatic iron overload. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2006
May-Jun;36(3):347-54. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2006.01.011. Epub 2006 Apr 3. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Anemia Genetic Disorders Hemochromatosis MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Related Medical Tests Iron Tests Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated November 1, 2014