Denys-Drash syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Denys-Drash syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/denys-drash-syndrome/ Denys-Drash syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Denys-Drash syndrome is a condition that affects the kidneys and genitalia . Denys-Drash syndrome is characterized by kidney disease that begins within the first few months of life. Affected individuals have a condition called diffuse glomerulosclerosis, in which scar tissue forms throughout glomeruli, which are the tiny blood vessels in the kidneys that filter waste from blood. In people with Denys-Drash syndrome, this condition often leads to kidney failure in childhood. People with Denys-Drash syndrome have an estimated 90 percent chance of developing a rare form of kidney cancer known as Wilms tumor . Affected individuals may develop multiple tumors in one or both kidneys. Although males with Denys-Drash syndrome have the typical male chromosome pattern ( 46,XY ), they have gonadal dysgenesis, in which external genitalia do not look clearly male or clearly female or the genitalia appear  female-typical. The testes of affected males are undescended, which means they are abnormally located in the pelvis, abdomen, or groin. As a result, males with Denys-Drash are typically unable to have biological children (infertile). Affected females usually have normal genitalia and have only the kidney features of the condition. Because they do not have all the features of the condition, females are usually given the diagnosis of isolated nephrotic syndrome. Frequency The prevalence of Denys-Drash syndrome is unknown; at least 150 affected individuals have been reported in the scientific literature. Causes Mutations in the WT1 gene cause Denys-Drash syndrome. The WT1 gene provides instructions for making a protein that regulates the activity of other genes by attaching (binding) to specific regions of DNA . On the basis of this action, the WT1 protein is called a transcription factor. The WT1 protein plays a role in the development of the kidneys and gonads (ovaries in females and testes in males) before birth. WT1 gene mutations that cause Denys-Drash syndrome lead to the production of an abnormal protein that cannot bind to DNA. As a result, the activity of certain genes is unregulated, which impairs the development of the kidneys and reproductive organs. Abnormal development of these organs leads to diffuse glomerulosclerosis and gonadal dysgenesis, which are characteristic of Denys-Drash syndrome. Abnormal gene activity caused by the loss of normal WT1 protein increases the risk of developing Wilms tumor in affected individuals. Denys-Drash syndrome has features similar to another condition called Frasier syndrome , which is also caused by mutations in the WT1 gene. Because these two conditions share a genetic cause and have overlapping features, some researchers have suggested that they are part of a spectrum and not two distinct conditions. Learn more about the gene associated with Denys-Drash syndrome WT1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition DDS Drash syndrome Nephropathy, Wilms tumor, and genital anomalies Wilms tumor and pseudohermaphroditism Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Drash syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Denys-Drash syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM DENYS-DRASH SYNDROME; DDS Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Andrade JG, Guaragna MS, Soardi FC, Guerra-Junior G, Mello MP, Maciel-Guerra
AT. Clinical and genetic findings of five patients with WT1-related disorders.
Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2008 Nov;52(8):1236-43. doi:
10.1590/s0004-27302008000800006. Citation on PubMed Dai YL, Fu JF, Hong F, Xu S, Shen Z. WT1 mutation as a cause of 46 XY DSD and
Wilm's tumour: a case report and literature review. Acta Paediatr. 2011
Jul;100(7):e39-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1651-2227.2011.02167.x. Epub 2011 Feb 14. Citation on PubMed Guaragna MS, Soardi FC, Assumpcao JG, Zambaldi Lde J, Cardinalli IA, Yunes JA,
de Mello MP, Brandalise SR, Aguiar Sdos S. The novel WT1 gene mutation p.H377N
associated to Denys-Drash syndrome. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2010
Aug;32(6):486-8. doi: 10.1097/MPH.0b013e3181e5e20d. Citation on PubMed Niaudet P, Gubler MC. WT1 and glomerular diseases. Pediatr Nephrol. 2006
Nov;21(11):1653-60. doi: 10.1007/s00467-006-0208-1. Epub 2006 Aug 23. Citation on PubMed Yue Z, Pei Y, Sun L, Huang W, Huang H, Hu B, Yang J, Jiang X, Mo Y, Chen S,
Lai KN, Wang Y. Clinical pictures and novel mutations of WT1-associated
Denys-Drash syndrome in two Chinese children. Ren Fail. 2011;33(9):910-4. doi:
10.3109/0886022X.2011.605528. Epub 2011 Aug 18. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Kidney Diseases Kidney Failure Wilms Tumor MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Ambiguous genitalia Genetics Nephrotic syndrome Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 1, 2013