Spastic paraplegia type 15: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Spastic paraplegia type 15 URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/spastic-paraplegia-type-15/ Spastic paraplegia type 15 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Spastic paraplegia type 15 is part of a group of genetic disorders known as hereditary spastic paraplegias. These disorders are characterized by progressive muscle stiffness (spasticity) and the development of paralysis of the lower limbs (paraplegia). Spastic paraplegia type 15 is classified as a complex hereditary spastic paraplegia because it involves all four limbs as well as additional features, including abnormalities of the brain. In addition to the muscles and brain, spastic paraplegia type 15 affects the peripheral nervous system, which consists of nerves connecting the brain and spinal cord to muscles and sensory cells that detect sensations such as touch, pain, heat, and sound. Spastic paraplegia type 15 usually becomes apparent in childhood or adolescence with the development of weak muscle tone (hypotonia), difficulty walking, or intellectual disability. In almost all affected individuals, the tissue connecting the left and right halves of the brain ( corpus callosum ) is abnormally thin and becomes thinner over time. Additionally, there is often a loss (atrophy) of nerve cells in several parts of the brain, including the cerebral cortex, which controls thinking and emotions, and the cerebellum, which coordinates movement. People with this form of spastic paraplegia can have numbness, tingling, or pain in the arms and legs (sensory neuropathy); impairment of the nerves used for muscle movement (motor neuropathy); exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia) of the lower limbs; muscle wasting (amyotrophy); or reduced bladder control. Rarely, spastic paraplegia type 15 is associated with a group of movement abnormalities called parkinsonism, which includes tremors, rigidity, and unusually slow movement (bradykinesia). People with spastic paraplegia type 15 may have an eye condition called pigmentary maculopathy that often impairs vision. This condition results from the breakdown (degeneration) of tissue at the back of the eye called the macula , which is responsible for sharp central vision. Most people with spastic paraplegia type 15 experience a decline in intellectual ability and an increase in muscle weakness and nerve abnormalities over time. As the condition progresses, many people require walking aids or wheelchair assistance in adulthood. Frequency Spastic paraplegia type 15 is a rare condition, although its exact prevalence is unknown. Causes Mutations in the ZFYVE26 gene cause spastic paraplegia type 15. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called spastizin. This protein is important in a process called autophagy, in which worn-out cell parts and unneeded proteins are recycled within cells. Specifically, spastizin is involved in the formation and maturation of sacs called autophagosomes (or autophagic vacuoles) that transport unneeded materials to be broken down. Spastizin also plays a role in the process by which dividing cells separate from one another ( cytokinesis ). Many ZFYVE26 gene mutations that cause spastic paraplegia type 15 result in a shortened spastizin protein that is quickly broken down. As a result, functional autophagosomes are not produced, autophagy cannot occur, and recycling of materials within cells is decreased. An inability to break down unneeded materials, and the subsequent accumulation of these materials in cells, leads to cell dysfunction and often cell death. The loss of cells in the brain and other parts of the body is responsible for many of the features of spastic paraplegia type 15. It is unclear whether a lack of spastizin protein interferes with normal cytokinesis and whether impaired cell division contributes to the signs and symptoms of spastic paraplegia type 15. Learn more about the gene associated with Spastic paraplegia type 15 ZFYVE26 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia 15 Kjellin syndrome Spastic paraplegia and retinal degeneration SPG15 Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary spastic paraplegia Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary spastic paraplegia 15 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia type 15 Hereditary spastic paraplegia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 15, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE; SPG15 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Boukhris A, Stevanin G, Feki I, Denis E, Elleuch N, Miladi MI, Truchetto J,
Denora P, Belal S, Mhiri C, Brice A. Hereditary spastic paraplegia with mental
impairment and thin corpus callosum in Tunisia: SPG11, SPG15, and further genetic
heterogeneity. Arch Neurol. 2008 Mar;65(3):393-402. doi:
10.1001/archneur.65.3.393. Citation on PubMed Denora PS, Muglia M, Casali C, Truchetto J, Silvestri G, Messina D, Boukrhis
A, Magariello A, Modoni A, Masciullo M, Malandrini A, Morelli M, de Leva MF,
Villanova M, Giugni E, Citrigno L, Rizza T, Federico A, Pierallini A, Quattrone
A, Filla A, Brice A, Stevanin G, Santorelli FM. Spastic paraplegia with thinning
of the corpus callosum and white matter abnormalities: further mutations and
relative frequency in ZFYVE26/SPG15 in the Italian population. J Neurol Sci. 2009
Feb 15;277(1-2):22-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2008.09.039. Epub 2008 Dec 13. Citation on PubMed Ebrahimi-Fakhari D, Alecu JE, Blackstone C. Spastic Paraplegia 15. 2021 May
27. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington,
Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK570772/ Citation on PubMed Goizet C, Boukhris A, Maltete D, Guyant-Marechal L, Truchetto J, Mundwiller E,
Hanein S, Jonveaux P, Roelens F, Loureiro J, Godet E, Forlani S, Melki J,
Auer-Grumbach M, Fernandez JC, Martin-Hardy P, Sibon I, Sole G, Orignac I, Mhiri
C, Coutinho P, Durr A, Brice A, Stevanin G. SPG15 is the second most common cause
of hereditary spastic paraplegia with thin corpus callosum. Neurology. 2009 Oct
6;73(14):1111-9. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181bacf59. Citation on PubMed Hanein S, Martin E, Boukhris A, Byrne P, Goizet C, Hamri A, Benomar A, Lossos
A, Denora P, Fernandez J, Elleuch N, Forlani S, Durr A, Feki I, Hutchinson M,
Santorelli FM, Mhiri C, Brice A, Stevanin G. Identification of the SPG15 gene,
encoding spastizin, as a frequent cause of complicated autosomal-recessive
spastic paraplegia, including Kjellin syndrome. Am J Hum Genet. 2008
Apr;82(4):992-1002. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.03.004. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Mallaret M, Lagha-Boukbiza O, Biskup S, Namer IJ, Rudolf G, Anheim M,
Tranchant C. SPG15: a cause of juvenile atypical levodopa responsive
parkinsonism. J Neurol. 2014 Feb;261(2):435-7. doi: 10.1007/s00415-013-7216-4.
Epub 2013 Dec 24. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Vantaggiato C, Clementi E, Bassi MT. ZFYVE26/SPASTIZIN: a close link between
complicated hereditary spastic paraparesis and autophagy. Autophagy. 2014
Feb;10(2):374-5. doi: 10.4161/auto.27173. Epub 2013 Nov 26. Citation on PubMed Vantaggiato C, Crimella C, Airoldi G, Polishchuk R, Bonato S, Brighina E,
Scarlato M, Musumeci O, Toscano A, Martinuzzi A, Santorelli FM, Ballabio A,
Bresolin N, Clementi E, Bassi MT. Defective autophagy in spastizin mutated
patients with hereditary spastic paraparesis type 15. Brain. 2013 Oct;136(Pt
10):3119-39. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt227. Epub 2013 Sep 11. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Neuromuscular Disorders Paralysis Peripheral Nerve Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated April 1, 2014