Very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/very-long-chain-acyl-coa-dehydrogenase-deficiency/ Very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD) deficiency is a condition that prevents the body from converting certain fats into energy, particularly during periods without food (fasting). There are three forms of VLCAD deficiency, and they are defined by when the signs and symptoms of the condition begin. The early-onset form is the most severe and begins in infancy. Signs and symptoms can include lack of energy (lethargy) and muscle weakness. People with VCLAD deficiency can have low blood sugar (glucose), known as hypoglycemia. Affected individuals are also at risk for serious complications such, as liver abnormalities and life-threatening heart problems. Individuals with childhood-onset VLCAD deficiency typically experience an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly) and low blood glucose. This form is sometimes referred to as the hepatic or hypoketotic hypoglycemic form because of these signs. Additional signs and symptoms include other liver problems or muscle weakness. The adult-onset form, which begins in adolescence or adulthood, usually involves muscle pain and the breakdown of muscle tissue (rhabdomyolysis). The destruction of muscle tissue releases a large amount of a protein called myoglobin, which is processed by the kidneys and released in the urine (myoglobinuria). Myoglobinuria causes the urine to be red or brown. In both children and adults, problems related to VLCAD deficiency can be triggered by periods of fasting, illness, exercise, and exposure to hot or cold temperatures. In children, this disorder is sometimes mistaken for Reye syndrome, a severe disorder that may develop in children while they appear to be recovering from viral infections such as chicken pox or flu. Most cases of Reye syndrome occur in children who take aspirin during these viral infections. Frequency VLCAD deficiency is estimated to affect 1 in 40,000 to 120,000 people. Causes Variants (also called mutations) in the ACADVL gene cause VLCAD deficiency. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, which is required to break down (metabolize) a group of fats called very long-chain fatty acids. These fatty acids are found in foods and the body's fat tissues. Fatty acids are a major source of energy for the heart and muscles. During periods of fasting, fatty acids are also an important energy source for the liver and other tissues. Variants in the ACADVL gene lead to a shortage (deficiency) of the VLCAD enzyme within cells. When cells do not have enough of this enzyme, very long-chain fatty acids are not broken down properly. As a result, these fats are not converted to energy, which can lead to  signs and symptoms of the disorder such as lethargy and hypoglycemia. Very long-chain fatty acids or partially metabolized fatty acids may also build up in tissues and damage the heart, liver, and muscles. This abnormal buildup causes the other signs and symptoms of VLCAD deficiency. Learn more about the gene associated with Very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency ACADVL Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell must have a variant to cause the disorder. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition ACADVL Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase very long chain deficiency Very long-chain acyl coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency Very long-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency VLCAD deficiency VLCAD-C VLCAD-H Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Very long chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Very long chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM ACYL-CoA DEHYDROGENASE, VERY LONG-CHAIN, DEFICIENCY OF; ACADVLD Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Diekman EF, Ferdinandusse S, van der Pol L, Waterham HR, Ruiter JP, Ijlst L,
Wanders RJ, Houten SM, Wijburg FA, Blank AC, Asselbergs FW, Houtkooper RH, Visser
G. Fatty acid oxidation flux predicts the clinical severity of VLCAD deficiency.
Genet Med. 2015 Dec;17(12):989-94. doi: 10.1038/gim.2015.22. Epub 2015 Apr 2. Citation on PubMed Evans M, Andresen BS, Nation J, Boneh A. VLCAD deficiency: Follow-up and
outcome of patients diagnosed through newborn screening in Victoria. Mol Genet
Metab. 2016 Aug;118(4):282-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.05.012. Epub 2016 May 16. Citation on PubMed Laforet P, Acquaviva-Bourdain C, Rigal O, Brivet M, Penisson-Besnier I,
Chabrol B, Chaigne D, Boespflug-Tanguy O, Laroche C, Bedat-Millet AL, Behin A,
Delevaux I, Lombes A, Andresen BS, Eymard B, Vianey-Saban C. Diagnostic
assessment and long-term follow-up of 13 patients with Very Long-Chain
Acyl-Coenzyme A dehydrogenase (VLCAD) deficiency. Neuromuscul Disord. 2009
May;19(5):324-9. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2009.02.007. Epub 2009 Mar 26. Citation on PubMed Miller MJ, Burrage LC, Gibson JB, Strenk ME, Lose EJ, Bick DP, Elsea SH,
Sutton VR, Sun Q, Graham BH, Craigen WJ, Zhang VW, Wong LJ. Recurrent ACADVL
molecular findings in individuals with a positive newborn screen for very long
chain acyl-coA dehydrogenase (VLCAD) deficiency in the United States. Mol Genet
Metab. 2015 Nov;116(3):139-45. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2015.08.011. Epub 2015 Sep 2. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Pena LD, van Calcar SC, Hansen J, Edick MJ, Walsh Vockley C, Leslie N, Cameron
C, Mohsen AW, Berry SA, Arnold GL, Vockley J; IBEMC. Outcomes and
genotype-phenotype correlations in 52 individuals with VLCAD deficiency diagnosed
by NBS and enrolled in the IBEM-IS database. Mol Genet Metab. 2016
Aug;118(4):272-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.05.007. Epub 2016 May 13. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Spiekerkoetter U, Sun B, Zytkovicz T, Wanders R, Strauss AW, Wendel U.
MS/MS-based newborn and family screening detects asymptomatic patients with
very-long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency. J Pediatr. 2003
Sep;143(3):335-42. doi: 10.1067/S0022-3476(03)00292-0. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Lipid Metabolism Disorders Newborn Screening MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Newborn screening tests Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 26, 2023