Glutathione synthetase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Glutathione synthetase deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/glutathione-synthetase-deficiency/ Glutathione synthetase deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Glutathione synthetase deficiency is a disorder that prevents the production of an important molecule called glutathione. Glutathione helps prevent damage to cells by neutralizing harmful molecules generated during energy production. Glutathione also plays a role in processing medications and cancer-causing compounds (carcinogens), and building DNA, proteins, and other important cellular components. Glutathione synthetase deficiency can be classified into three types: mild, moderate, and severe. Mild glutathione synthetase deficiency usually results in the destruction of red blood cells (hemolytic anemia). In addition, affected individuals may release large amounts of a compound called 5-oxoproline in their urine (5-oxoprolinuria). This compound builds up when glutathione is not processed correctly in cells. Individuals with moderate glutathione synthetase deficiency may experience symptoms beginning shortly after birth including hemolytic anemia, 5-oxoprolinuria, and elevated acidity in the blood and tissues (metabolic acidosis). In addition to the features present in moderate glutathione synthetase deficiency, individuals affected by the severe form of this disorder may experience neurological symptoms. These problems may include seizures; a generalized slowing down of physical reactions, movements, and speech (psychomotor retardation); intellectual disability; and a loss of coordination (ataxia). Some people with severe glutathione synthetase deficiency also develop recurrent bacterial infections. Frequency Glutathione synthetase deficiency is very rare. This disorder has been described in more than 70 people worldwide. Causes Mutations in the GSS gene cause glutathione synthetase deficiency. The GSS gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called glutathione synthetase. This enzyme is involved in a process called the gamma-glutamyl cycle, which takes place in most of the body's cells. This cycle is necessary for producing a molecule called glutathione. Glutathione protects cells from damage caused by unstable oxygen-containing molecules, which are byproducts of energy production. Glutathione is called an antioxidant because of its role in protecting cells from the damaging effects of these unstable molecules. Mutations in the GSS gene prevent cells from making adequate levels of glutathione, leading to the signs and symptoms of glutathione synthetase deficiency. Learn more about the gene associated with Glutathione synthetase deficiency GSS Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition 5-oxoprolinemia 5-oxoprolinuria Deficiency of glutathione synthase Deficiency of glutathione synthetase Pyroglutamic acidemia Pyroglutamic aciduria Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Glutathione synthetase deficiency with 5-oxoprolinuria Genetic Testing Registry: Glutathione synthetase deficiency without 5-oxoprolinuria Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Glutathione synthetase deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM GLUTATHIONE SYNTHETASE DEFICIENCY; GSSD ANEMIA, CONGENITAL, NONSPHEROCYTIC HEMOLYTIC, 6; CNSHA6 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Al-Jishi E, Meyer BF, Rashed MS, Al-Essa M, Al-Hamed MH, Sakati N, Sanjad S,
Ozand PT, Kambouris M. Clinical, biochemical, and molecular characterization of
patients with glutathione synthetase deficiency. Clin Genet. 1999
Jun;55(6):444-9. doi: 10.1034/j.1399-0004.1999.550608.x. Citation on PubMed Ben Ameur S, Aloulou H, Nasrallah F, Kamoun T, Kaabachi N, Hachicha M.
Hemolytic anemia and metabolic acidosis: think about glutathione synthetase
deficiency. Fetal Pediatr Pathol. 2015 Feb;34(1):18-20. doi:
10.3109/15513815.2014.947543. Epub 2014 Aug 28. Citation on PubMed Njalsson R, Norgren S. Physiological and pathological aspects of GSH
metabolism. Acta Paediatr. 2005 Feb;94(2):132-7. doi:
10.1111/j.1651-2227.2005.tb01878.x. Citation on PubMed Njalsson R, Ristoff E, Carlsson K, Winkler A, Larsson A, Norgren S. Genotype,
enzyme activity, glutathione level, and clinical phenotype in patients with
glutathione synthetase deficiency. Hum Genet. 2005 Apr;116(5):384-9. doi:
10.1007/s00439-005-1255-6. Epub 2005 Feb 17. Citation on PubMed Njalsson R. Glutathione synthetase deficiency. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2005
Sep;62(17):1938-45. doi: 10.1007/s00018-005-5163-7. Citation on PubMed Ristoff E, Larsson A. Inborn errors in the metabolism of glutathione. Orphanet
J Rare Dis. 2007 Mar 30;2:16. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-16. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Wu G, Fang YZ, Yang S, Lupton JR, Turner ND. Glutathione metabolism and its
implications for health. J Nutr. 2004 Mar;134(3):489-92. doi:
10.1093/jn/134.3.489. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Brain Disorders Genetic Disorders Metabolic Disorders Newborn Screening MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 1, 2015