Congenital hepatic fibrosis: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Congenital hepatic fibrosis URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/congenital-hepatic-fibrosis/ Congenital hepatic fibrosis To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Congenital hepatic fibrosis is a disease of the liver that is present from birth. The liver has many important functions, including producing various substances needed by the body and breaking down other substances into smaller parts to be used or removed from the body. Congenital hepatic fibrosis is characterized by abnormal formation of the bile ducts and the blood vessels of the hepatic portal system. Bile ducts carry bile (a fluid that helps to digest fats) from the liver to the gallbladder and small intestine. The hepatic portal system is a branching network of veins (portal veins) that carry blood from the gastrointestinal tract to the liver for processing. A buildup of scar tissue (fibrosis) in the portal tracts also occurs in this disorder. Portal tracts are structures in the liver that bundle the vessels through which blood, lymph , and bile flow. Lymph is a fluid that helps exchange immune cells, proteins, and other substances between the blood and tissues. Fibrosis in the portal tracts can restrict the normal movement of fluids in these vessels. Narrowing of the portal veins due to malformation and portal tract fibrosis results in high blood pressure in the hepatic portal system (portal hypertension ). Portal hypertension impairs the flow of blood from the gastrointestinal tract , causing an increase in pressure in the veins of the esophagus, stomach, and intestines. These veins may stretch and their walls may become thin, leading to a risk of abnormal bleeding. People with congenital hepatic fibrosis have an enlarged liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly). The liver is also abnormally shaped. Affected individuals also have an increased risk of infection of the bile ducts (cholangitis), hard deposits in the gallbladder or bile ducts (gallstones), and cancer of the liver or gallbladder. Congenital hepatic fibrosis may occur alone, in which case it is called isolated congenital hepatic fibrosis. More frequently, it occurs as a feature of genetic syndromes that also affect the kidneys, such as polycystic kidney disease (PKD). Frequency Isolated congenital hepatic fibrosis is rare. Its prevalence is unknown. The total prevalence of syndromes that include congenital hepatic fibrosis as a feature is estimated to be 1 in 10,000 to 20,000 individuals. Causes Syndromes that include congenital hepatic fibrosis may be caused by changes in many different genes. The gene changes that cause isolated congenital hepatic fibrosis are unknown. Congenital hepatic fibrosis is caused by problems in the development of the portal veins and bile ducts before birth. These problems include abnormal formation of embryonic structures called ductal plates. Each ductal plate is a cylinder of cells surrounding branches of the portal veins. The ductal plates normally develop into the network of bile ducts. In congenital hepatic fibrosis, the development of the ductal plates does not proceed normally, and the bile ducts remain immature. Branching of the portal vein network also proceeds abnormally, and excess fibrous tissue develops in the portal tracts. The abnormalities of the portal veins and bile ducts disrupt the normal flow of blood and bile, which leads to the progressive signs and symptoms of congenital hepatic fibrosis. Inheritance The various syndromes that include congenital hepatic fibrosis can have different inheritance patterns. Most of these disorders are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the associated gene in each cell have variants (also known as mutations). The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Rare syndromes involving congenital hepatic fibrosis may be inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern , in which the gene associated with the syndrome is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In isolated congenital hepatic fibrosis, the inheritance pattern is unknown. Other Names for This Condition CHF Congenital fibrose liver Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital hepatic fibrosis Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Polycystic kidney disease 4 with or without polycystic liver disease Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM POLYCYSTIC KIDNEY DISEASE 4 WITH OR WITHOUT POLYCYSTIC LIVER DISEASE; PKD4 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Gunay-Aygun M. Liver and kidney disease in ciliopathies. Am J Med Genet C
Semin Med Genet. 2009 Nov 15;151C(4):296-306. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.30225. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Ling SC. Congenital cholestatic syndromes: what happens when children grow up?
Can J Gastroenterol. 2007 Nov;21(11):743-51. doi: 10.1155/2007/581247. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Rawat D, Kelly DA, Milford DV, Sharif K, Lloyd C, McKiernan PJ. Phenotypic
variation and long-term outcome in children with congenital hepatic fibrosis. J
Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2013 Aug;57(2):161-6. doi:
10.1097/MPG.0b013e318291e72b. Citation on PubMed Rock N, McLin V. Liver involvement in children with ciliopathies. Clin Res
Hepatol Gastroenterol. 2014 Sep;38(4):407-14. doi: 10.1016/j.clinre.2014.04.001.
Epub 2014 Jun 19. Citation on PubMed Shorbagi A, Bayraktar Y. Experience of a single center with congenital hepatic
fibrosis: a review of the literature. World J Gastroenterol. 2010 Feb
14;16(6):683-90. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v16.i6.683. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Veigel MC, Prescott-Focht J, Rodriguez MG, Zinati R, Shao L, Moore CA, Lowe
LH. Fibropolycystic liver disease in children. Pediatr Radiol. 2009
Apr;39(4):317-27; quiz 420-1. doi: 10.1007/s00247-008-1070-z. Epub 2008 Dec 16. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Liver Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Liver disease Related Medical Tests Liver Function Tests Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated April 6, 2023