Tarsal-carpal coalition syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Tarsal-carpal coalition syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/tarsal-carpal-coalition-syndrome/ Tarsal-carpal coalition syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Tarsal-carpal coalition syndrome is a rare, inherited bone disorder that affects primarily the hands and feet. Several individual bones make up each wrist (carpal bones) and ankle (tarsal bones). In tarsal-carpal coalition syndrome, the carpal bones fuse together, as do the tarsal bones, which causes stiffness and immobility of the hands and feet. Symptoms of the condition can become apparent in infancy, and they worsen with age. The severity of the symptoms can vary, even among members of the same family. In this condition, fusion at the joints between the bones that make up each finger and toe (symphalangism) can also occur. Consequently, the fingers and toes become stiff and difficult to bend. Stiffness of the pinky fingers and toes (fifth digits) is usually noticeable first. The joints at the base of the pinky fingers and toes fuse first, and slowly, the other joints along the length of these digits may also be affected. Progressively, the bones in the fourth, third, and second digits (the ring finger, middle finger, and forefinger, and the corresponding toes) become fused. The thumb and big toe are usually not involved. Affected individuals have increasing trouble forming a fist, and walking often becomes painful and difficult. Occasionally, there is also fusion of bones in the upper and lower arm at the elbow joint (humeroradial fusion). Less common features of tarsal-carpal coalition syndrome include short stature or the development of hearing loss. Frequency This condition is very rare; however, the exact prevalence is unknown. Causes Tarsal-carpal coalition syndrome is caused by mutations in the NOG gene, which provides instructions for making a protein called noggin. This protein plays an important role in proper bone and joint development by blocking (inhibiting) signals that stimulate bone formation. The noggin protein attaches (binds) to proteins called bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), which keeps the BMPs from triggering signals for the development of bone. NOG gene mutations that cause tarsal-carpal coalition syndrome reduce the amount of functional noggin protein. With decreased noggin function, BMPs abnormally stimulate bone formation in joint areas, where there should be no bone, causing the bone fusions seen in people with tarsal-carpal coalition syndrome. Mutations in the NOG gene are involved in several disorders with overlapping signs and symptoms. Because of a shared genetic cause and overlapping features, researchers have suggested that these conditions, including tarsal-carpal coalition syndrome, represent a spectrum of related conditions referred to as NOG -related-symphalangism spectrum disorder ( NOG -SSD). Learn more about the gene associated with Tarsal-carpal coalition syndrome NOG Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition NOG-related-symphalangism spectrum disorder TCC Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Tarsal-carpal coalition syndrome Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Tarsal-carpal coalition syndrome Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM TARSAL-CARPAL COALITION SYNDROME; TCC Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Dixon ME, Armstrong P, Stevens DB, Bamshad M. Identical mutations in NOG can
cause either tarsal/carpal coalition syndrome or proximal symphalangism. Genet
Med. 2001 Sep-Oct;3(5):349-53. doi: 10.1097/00125817-200109000-00004. Citation on PubMed Drawbert JP, Stevens DB, Cadle RG, Hall BD. Tarsal and carpal coalition and
symphalangism of the Fuhrmann type. Report of a family. J Bone Joint Surg Am.
1985 Jul;67(6):884-9. Citation on PubMed Groppe J, Greenwald J, Wiater E, Rodriguez-Leon J, Economides AN, Kwiatkowski
W, Affolter M, Vale WW, Izpisua Belmonte JC, Choe S. Structural basis of BMP
signalling inhibition by the cystine knot protein Noggin. Nature. 2002 Dec
12;420(6916):636-42. doi: 10.1038/nature01245. Citation on PubMed Marcelino J, Sciortino CM, Romero MF, Ulatowski LM, Ballock RT, Economides AN,
Eimon PM, Harland RM, Warman ML. Human disease-causing NOG missense mutations:
effects on noggin secretion, dimer formation, and bone morphogenetic protein
binding. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Sep 25;98(20):11353-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.201367598. Epub 2001 Sep 18. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Potti TA, Petty EM, Lesperance MM. A comprehensive review of reported
heritable noggin-associated syndromes and proposed clinical utility of one
broadly inclusive diagnostic term: NOG-related-symphalangism spectrum disorder
(NOG-SSD). Hum Mutat. 2011 Aug;32(8):877-86. doi: 10.1002/humu.21515. Epub 2011
Jun 21. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Bone Diseases Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated April 1, 2012