Distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type II: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type II URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/distal-hereditary-motor-neuropathy-type-ii/ Distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type II To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type II is a progressive disorder that affects nerve cells ( neurons ) in the brain and spinal cord. This condition specifically affects motor neurons , which are specialized cells that control muscle movement. Damage to motor neurons results in muscle weakness that worsens over time. Distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type II weakness primarily affects movement in the legs. The signs and symptoms of distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type II often begin in adolescence to mid-adulthood. The initial symptoms of the disorder are cramps or weakness in the muscles of the big toe and, later, the entire foot. During the next 5 to 10 years, affected individuals experience a gradual loss of muscle tissue (atrophy) in the lower legs, which can lead to problems with walking (gait disturbance) and high arches ( pes cavus ). Over time, the lower legs may become paralyzed. The thigh muscles may also undergo muscle atrophy, although this generally occurs later and is less severe than the muscle atrophy in the lower legs. Some individuals with distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type II can also experience weaken the muscles in the hands and forearms. This weakening is less severe than the weakening in the lower limbs and does not usually lead to paralysis. In rare cases, affected individuals experience hearing loss. People with distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type II can have exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia) or other minor disturbances in the nerves used to detect sensations (sensory neuropathy). Sensory neuropathy is uncommon in people with distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type II and is typically a feature of a disorder called Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease . These two disorders have overlapping features and can also share a genetic Frequency The prevalence of all types of distal hereditary motor neuropathy is estimated to be about 2 in 100,000 individuals. Distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type II accounts for 8 to 15 percent of all cases of distal hereditary motor neuropathy. Causes Variants (also called mutations) in multiple genes can cause distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type II.  Most commonly, variants in the HSPB1 and HSPB8 genes cause this condition. These genes provide instructions for making proteins called heat shock proteins. Heat shock protein beta-1 is made from the HSPB1 gene, and heat shock protein beta-8 is made from the HSPB8 gene. Heat shock proteins help protect cells that are under stress from factors such as infection, inflammation, exposure to toxins, elevated temperature, injury, and disease. In addition, these proteins appear to be involved in stabilizing the cell's structural framework (the cytoskeleton), folding and stabilizing newly produced proteins, and repairing damaged proteins. Heat shock proteins also seem to play a role in the tensing of muscle fibers (muscle contraction). Heat shock protein beta-1 and heat shock protein beta-8 are found in cells throughout the body. These proteins help fold newly produced proteins and refold damaged proteins. These proteins are also involved in maintaining the structure of neurons. The HSPB1 and HSPB8 gene variants that cause distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type II typically lead to changes in single protein building blocks (amino acids) in the proteins. These changes can cause the proteins to form clusters (aggregates). These aggregates can build up and impair the function of cells, particularly motor neurons. In addition, neurons that do not have functional versions of these heat shock proteins are vulnerable to stress and cell damage. As a result, these cells are more likely to die off over time, leading to the signs and symptoms of distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type II. In rare cases, variants in other genes can cause distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type II. Learn more about the genes associated with Distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type II HSPB1 HSPB8 Additional Information from NCBI Gene: FBXO38 HSPB3 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition Distal hereditary motor neuronopathy, type II HMN II HMN2 HMND2 Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Neuronopathy, distal hereditary motor, type 2A Genetic Testing Registry: Neuronopathy, distal hereditary motor, type 2B Genetic Testing Registry: Neuronopathy, distal hereditary motor, type 2C Genetic Testing Registry: Neuronopathy, distal hereditary motor, type 2D Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Distal hereditary motor neuropathy type 2 Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM NEURONOPATHY, DISTAL HEREDITARY MOTOR, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 2; HMND2 NEURONOPATHY, DISTAL HEREDITARY MOTOR, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 3; HMND3 NEURONOPATHY, DISTAL HEREDITARY MOTOR, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 6; HMND6 NEURONOPATHY, DISTAL HEREDITARY MOTOR, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 4; HMND4 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Benquey T, Pion E, Cossee M, Krahn M, Stojkovic T, Perrin A, Cerino M, Molon
A, Lia AS, Magdelaine C, Francou B, Guiochon-Mantel A, Malinge MC, Leguern E,
Levy N, Attarian S, Latour P, Bonello-Palot N. A National French Consensus on
Gene List for the Diagnosis of Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease and Related Disorders
Using Next-Generation Sequencing. Genes (Basel). 2022 Feb 9;13(2):318. doi:
10.3390/genes13020318. Citation on PubMed Frasquet M, Rojas-Garcia R, Argente-Escrig H, Vazquez-Costa JF, Muelas N,
Vilchez JJ, Sivera R, Millet E, Barreiro M, Diaz-Manera J, Turon-Sans J,
Cortes-Vicente E, Querol L, Ramirez-Jimenez L, Martinez-Rubio D,
Sanchez-Monteagudo A, Espinos C, Sevilla T, Lupo V. Distal hereditary motor
neuropathies: Mutation spectrum and genotype-phenotype correlation. Eur J Neurol.
2021 Apr;28(4):1334-1343. doi: 10.1111/ene.14700. Epub 2021 Jan 10. Erratum In:
Eur J Neurol. 2022 Mar;29(3):955. doi: 10.1111/ene.15244. Citation on PubMed Hu Z, Chen L, Zhang J, Li T, Tang J, Xu N, Wang X. Structure, function,
property, and role in neurologic diseases and other diseases of the sHsp22. J
Neurosci Res. 2007 Aug 1;85(10):2071-9. doi: 10.1002/jnr.21231. Citation on PubMed Irobi J, Van Impe K, Seeman P, Jordanova A, Dierick I, Verpoorten N, Michalik
A, De Vriendt E, Jacobs A, Van Gerwen V, Vennekens K, Mazanec R, Tournev I,
Hilton-Jones D, Talbot K, Kremensky I, Van Den Bosch L, Robberecht W, Van
Vandekerckhove J, Van Broeckhoven C, Gettemans J, De Jonghe P, Timmerman V.
Hot-spot residue in small heat-shock protein 22 causes distal motor neuropathy.
Nat Genet. 2004 Jun;36(6):597-601. doi: 10.1038/ng1328. Epub 2004 May 2. Citation on PubMed Shen X, Zhang J, Zhan F, Tian W, Jiang Q, Luan X, Zhang X, Cao L.
Heterogeneous Clinical Phenotypes of dHMN Caused by Mutation in HSPB1
Gene: A Case Series. Biomolecules. 2022 Sep 27;12(10):1382. doi:
10.3390/biom12101382. Citation on PubMed Tazir M, Nouioua S. Distal hereditary motor neuropathies. Rev Neurol (Paris).
2024 Dec;180(10):1031-1036. doi: 10.1016/j.neurol.2023.09.005. Epub 2024 May 3. Citation on PubMed Tedesco B, Cristofani R, Ferrari V, Cozzi M, Rusmini P, Casarotto E,
Chierichetti M, Mina F, Galbiati M, Piccolella M, Crippa V, Poletti A. Insights
on Human Small Heat Shock Proteins and Their Alterations in Diseases. Front Mol
Biosci. 2022 Feb 25;9:842149. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.842149. eCollection 2022. Citation on PubMed Xie Y, Lin Z, Pakhrin PS, Li X, Wang B, Liu L, Huang S, Zhao H, Cao W, Hu Z,
Guo J, Shen L, Tang B, Zhang R. Genetic and Clinical Features in 24 Chinese
Distal Hereditary Motor Neuropathy Families. Front Neurol. 2020 Dec 14;11:603003.
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2020.603003. eCollection 2020. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Neuromuscular Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Weakness Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 3, 2025