Fibronectin glomerulopathy: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Fibronectin glomerulopathy URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/fibronectin-glomerulopathy/ Fibronectin glomerulopathy To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Fibronectin glomerulopathy is a kidney disease that usually develops between early and mid-adulthood but can occur at any age. It eventually leads to irreversible kidney failure (end-stage renal disease). Individuals with fibronectin glomerulopathy usually have blood and excess protein in their urine (hematuria and proteinuria, respectively). They also have high blood pressure ( hypertension ). Some affected individuals develop renal tubular acidosis, which occurs when the kidneys are unable to remove enough acid from the body and the blood becomes too acidic. The kidneys of people with fibronectin glomerulopathy have large deposits of the protein fibronectin-1 in structures called glomeruli. These structures are clusters of tiny blood vessels in the kidneys that filter waste products from blood . The waste products are then released in urine. The fibronectin-1 deposits impair the glomeruli's filtration ability. Fifteen to 20 years following the appearance of signs and symptoms, individuals with fibronectin glomerulopathy often develop end-stage renal disease. Affected individuals may receive treatment in the form of a kidney transplant; in some cases, fibronectin glomerulopathy comes back (recurs) following transplantation. Frequency Fibronectin glomerulopathy is likely a rare condition, although its prevalence is unknown. At least 45 cases have been described in the scientific literature. Causes Fibronectin glomerulopathy can be caused by mutations in the FN1 gene. The FN1 gene provides instructions for making the fibronectin-1 protein. Fibronectin-1 is involved in the continual formation of the extracellular matrix, which is an intricate lattice of proteins and other molecules that forms in the spaces between cells. During extracellular matrix formation, fibronectin-1 helps individual cells expand (spread) and move (migrate) to cover more space, and it also influences cell shape and maturation (differentiation). FN1 gene mutations lead to production of an abnormal fibronectin-1 protein that gets deposited in the glomeruli of the kidneys, probably as the body attempts to filter it out as waste . Even though there is an abundance of fibronectin-1 in the glomeruli, the extracellular matrix that supports the blood vessels is weak because the altered fibronectin-1 cannot assist in the matrix's continual formation. Without a strong cellular support network, the glomeruli are less able to filter waste. As a result, products that normally are retained by the body, such as protein and blood, get released in the urine, and acids are not properly filtered from the blood. Over time, the kidneys' ability to filter waste decreases until the kidneys can no longer function, resulting in end-stage renal disease. It is estimated that mutations in the FN1 gene are responsible for 40 percent of cases of fibronectin glomerulopathy. The cause of the remaining cases of this condition is unknown. Learn more about the gene associated with Fibronectin glomerulopathy FN1 Inheritance When fibronectin glomerulopathy is caused by mutations in the FN1 gene, it is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In some of these cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent . Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Some people who have the altered FN1 gene never develop the condition, a situation known as reduced penetrance. Other Names for This Condition Familial glomerular nephritis with fibronectin deposits Familial lobular glomerulopathy GFND Glomerulopathy with fibronectin deposits Glomerulopathy with giant fibrillar deposits Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Glomerulopathy with fibronectin deposits 2 Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Glomerulopathy with fibronectin deposits 1 Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM GLOMERULOPATHY WITH FIBRONECTIN DEPOSITS 1; GFND1 GLOMERULOPATHY WITH FIBRONECTIN DEPOSITS 2; GFND2 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Castelletti F, Donadelli R, Banterla F, Hildebrandt F, Zipfel PF, Bresin E,
Otto E, Skerka C, Renieri A, Todeschini M, Caprioli J, Caruso RM, Artuso R,
Remuzzi G, Noris M. Mutations in FN1 cause glomerulopathy with fibronectin
deposits. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Feb 19;105(7):2538-43. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0707730105. Epub 2008 Feb 11. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Ertoy Baydar D, Kutlugun AA, Bresin E, Piras R. A case of familial
glomerulopathy with fibronectin deposits caused by the Y973C mutation in
fibronectin. Am J Kidney Dis. 2013 Mar;61(3):514-8. doi:
10.1053/j.ajkd.2012.08.050. Epub 2012 Dec 6. Citation on PubMed Otsuka Y, Takeda A, Horike K, Inaguma D, Goto N, Watarai Y, Uchida K, Mihatsch
MJ, Joh K, Morozumi K. A recurrent fibronectin glomerulopathy in a renal
transplant patient: a case report. Clin Transplant. 2012 Jul;26 Suppl 24:58-63.
doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0012.2012.01644.x. Citation on PubMed Yoshino M, Miura N, Ohnishi T, Suzuki K, Kitagawa W, Nishikawa K, Imai H.
Clinicopathological analysis of glomerulopathy with fibronectin deposits (GFND):
a case of sporadic, elderly-onset GFND with codeposition of IgA, C1q, and
fibrinogen. Intern Med. 2013;52(15):1715-20. doi:
10.2169/internalmedicine.52.0046. Epub 2012 Mar 1. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Chronic Kidney Disease Genetic Disorders High Blood Pressure Kidney Failure MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Urine protein dipstick test Related Medical Tests Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR) Test Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated April 1, 2015