Holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/holocarboxylase-synthetase-deficiency/ Holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency is an inherited disorder in which the body is unable to use the vitamin biotin effectively. This disorder is classified as a multiple carboxylase deficiency, which is a group of disorders characterized by impaired activity of certain enzymes that depend on biotin. The signs and symptoms of holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency typically appear within the first few months of life, but the age of onset varies. Affected infants often have difficulty feeding, breathing problems, a skin rash, hair loss (alopecia), and a lack of energy (lethargy). Immediate treatment and lifelong management with biotin supplements may prevent many of these complications. If left untreated, the disorder can lead to delayed development, seizures, and coma. These medical problems may be life-threatening in some cases. Frequency The exact incidence of this condition is unknown, but it is estimated to affect 1 in 87,000 people. Causes Mutations in the HLCS gene cause holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency. The HLCS gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called holocarboxylase synthetase. This enzyme is important for the effective use of biotin, a B vitamin found in foods such as liver, egg yolks, and milk. Holocarboxylase synthetase attaches biotin to certain enzymes that are essential for the normal production and breakdown of proteins, fats, and carbohydrates in the body. Mutations in the HLCS gene reduce the enzyme's ability to attach biotin to these enzymes, preventing them from processing nutrients properly and disrupting many cellular functions. These defects lead to the serious medical problems associated with holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency. Learn more about the gene associated with Holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency HLCS Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Biotin-(propionyl-CoA-carboxylase) ligase deficiency Biotin-(propionyl-coenzyme A-carboxylase) ligase deficiency Early-onset biotin-responsive multiple carboxylase deficiency Early-onset combined carboxylase deficiency HLCS deficiency Infantile multiple carboxylase deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM HOLOCARBOXYLASE SYNTHETASE DEFICIENCY Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Bandaralage SP, Farnaghi S, Dulhunty JM, Kothari A. Antenatal and postnatal
radiologic diagnosis of holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency: a systematic
review. Pediatr Radiol. 2016 Mar;46(3):357-64. doi: 10.1007/s00247-015-3492-8.
Epub 2016 Jan 11. Citation on PubMed Baumgartner MR. Vitamin-responsive disorders: cobalamin, folate, biotin,
vitamins B1 and E. Handb Clin Neurol. 2013;113:1799-810. doi:
10.1016/B978-0-444-59565-2.00049-6. Citation on PubMed Leon-Del-Rio A, Valadez-Graham V, Gravel RA. Holocarboxylase Synthetase: A
Moonlighting Transcriptional Coregulator of Gene Expression and a Cytosolic
Regulator of Biotin Utilization. Annu Rev Nutr. 2017 Aug 21;37:207-223. doi:
10.1146/annurev-nutr-042617-104653. Epub 2017 May 31. Citation on PubMed Morrone A, Malvagia S, Donati MA, Funghini S, Ciani F, Pela I, Boneh A, Peters
H, Pasquini E, Zammarchi E. Clinical findings and biochemical and molecular
analysis of four patients with holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency. Am J Med
Genet. 2002 Jul 22;111(1):10-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.10532. Citation on PubMed Tang NL, Hui J, Yong CK, Wong LT, Applegarth DA, Vallance HD, Law LK, Fung SL,
Mak TW, Sung YM, Cheung KL, Fok TF. A genomic approach to mutation analysis of
holocarboxylase synthetase gene in three Chinese patients with late-onset
holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency. Clin Biochem. 2003 Mar;36(2):145-9. doi:
10.1016/s0009-9120(02)00432-0. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Genetic Brain Disorders Genetic Disorders Metabolic Disorders Newborn Screening MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Pantothenic acid and biotin Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated May 1, 2020