Myostatin-related muscle hypertrophy: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Myostatin-related muscle hypertrophy URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/myostatin-related-muscle-hypertrophy/ Myostatin-related muscle hypertrophy To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Myostatin-related muscle hypertrophy is a rare condition characterized by reduced body fat and increased muscle size.  Affected individuals have up to twice the usual amount of muscle mass in their bodies.  They also tend to have increased muscle strength.  Myostatin-related muscle hypertrophy is not known to cause any medical problems, and affected individuals are intellectually normal. Frequency The prevalence of this condition is unknown. Causes Variants (also known as mutations) in the MSTN gene cause myostatin-related muscle hypertrophy.  The MSTN gene provides instructions for making a protein called myostatin, which is active in muscles used for movement (skeletal muscles) both before and after birth.  This protein normally limits muscle growth, ensuring that muscles do not grow too large. Variants that reduce the production of functional myostatin lead to an overgrowth of muscle tissue. Learn more about the gene associated with Myostatin-related muscle hypertrophy MSTN Inheritance Myostatin-related muscle hypertrophy has a pattern of inheritance known as incomplete autosomal dominance. People with a variant in both copies of the MSTN gene in each cell (homozygotes) have significantly increased muscle mass and strength.  People with a variant in one copy of the MSTN gene in each cell (heterozygotes) also have increased muscle bulk, but to a lesser degree. Other Names for This Condition Muscle hypertrophy syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Myostatin-related muscle hypertrophy Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MYOSTATIN; MSTN Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Carnac G, Ricaud S, Vernus B, Bonnieu A. Myostatin: biology and clinical
relevance. Mini Rev Med Chem. 2006 Jul;6(7):765-70. doi:
10.2174/138955706777698642. Citation on PubMed Schuelke M, Wagner KR, Stolz LE, Hubner C, Riebel T, Komen W, Braun T, Tobin
JF, Lee SJ. Myostatin mutation associated with gross muscle hypertrophy in a
child. N Engl J Med. 2004 Jun 24;350(26):2682-8. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa040933. No
abstract available. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Muscle Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated July 28, 2022