Chorea-acanthocytosis: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Chorea-acanthocytosis URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/chorea-acanthocytosis/ Chorea-acanthocytosis To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Chorea-acanthocytosis is primarily a neurological disorder that affects movement in many parts of the body. Chorea refers to the involuntary jerking movements made by people with this disorder.  People with this condition also have abnormal star-shaped red blood cells (acanthocytosis).  This condition is one of a group of conditions called neuroacanthocytoses that involve neurological problems and abnormal red blood cells. In addition to chorea, another common feature of chorea-acanthocytosis is involuntary tensing of various muscles (dystonia), such as those in the limbs, face, mouth, tongue, and throat.  These muscle twitches can cause vocal tics (such as grunting), involuntary belching, and limb spasms.  Eating can also be impaired as tongue and throat twitches can interfere with chewing and swallowing food.  People with chorea-acanthocytosis may uncontrollably bite their tongue, lips, and inside of the mouth.  Nearly half of all people with chorea-acanthocytosis have seizures. Individuals with chorea-acanthocytosis may develop difficulty processing, learning, and remembering information (cognitive impairment).   They may have reduced sensation and weakness in their arms and legs (peripheral neuropathy) and muscle weakness (myopathy).  Impaired muscle and nerve functioning commonly cause speech difficulties in individuals with this condition, and can lead to an inability to speak. Behavioral changes are a common feature of chorea-acanthocytosis and may be the first sign of this condition.  These behavioral changes may include changes in personality, obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), lack of self-restraint, and the inability to take care of oneself. The signs and symptoms of chorea-acanthocytosis usually begin in early to mid-adulthood.  The movement problems of this condition worsen with age.  Loss of cells (atrophy) in certain brain regions is the major cause of the neurological problems seen in people with chorea-acanthocytosis. Frequency It is estimated that 500 to 1,000 people worldwide have chorea-acanthocytosis. Causes Mutations in the VPS13A gene cause chorea-acanthocytosis.  The VPS13A gene provides instructions for producing a protein called chorein; the function of this protein in the body is unknown.  Some researchers believe that chorein plays a role in the movement of proteins within cells.  Most VPS13A gene mutations lead to the production of an abnormally small, nonfunctional version of chorein.  The VPS13A gene is active (expressed) throughout the body; it is unclear why mutations in this gene affect only the brain and red blood cells. Learn more about the gene associated with Chorea-acanthocytosis VPS13A Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition CHAC Choreoacanthocytosis Neuroacanthocytosis Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Chorea-acanthocytosis Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Choreoacanthocytosis Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM CHOREOACANTHOCYTOSIS; CHAC Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Benninger F, Afawi Z, Korczyn AD, Oliver KL, Pendziwiat M, Nakamura M, Sano A,
Helbig I, Berkovic SF, Blatt I. Seizures as presenting and prominent symptom in
chorea-acanthocytosis with c.2343del VPS13A gene mutation. Epilepsia. 2016
Apr;57(4):549-56. doi: 10.1111/epi.13318. Epub 2016 Jan 27. Citation on PubMed Connolly BS, Hazrati LN, Lang AE. Neuropathological findings in
chorea-acanthocytosis: new insights into mechanisms underlying parkinsonism and
seizures. Acta Neuropathol. 2014 Apr;127(4):613-5. doi:
10.1007/s00401-013-1241-3. Epub 2014 Jan 7. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Dobson-Stone C, Danek A, Rampoldi L, Hardie RJ, Chalmers RM, Wood NW, Bohlega
S, Dotti MT, Federico A, Shizuka M, Tanaka M, Watanabe M, Ikeda Y, Brin M,
Goldfarb LG, Karp BI, Mohiddin S, Fananapazir L, Storch A, Fryer AE, Maddison P,
Sibon I, Trevisol-Bittencourt PC, Singer C, Caballero IR, Aasly JO, Schmierer K,
Dengler R, Hiersemenzel LP, Zeviani M, Meiner V, Lossos A, Johnson S, Mercado FC,
Sorrentino G, Dupre N, Rouleau GA, Volkmann J, Arpa J, Lees A, Geraud G,
Chouinard S, Nemeth A, Monaco AP. Mutational spectrum of the CHAC gene in
patients with chorea-acanthocytosis. Eur J Hum Genet. 2002 Nov;10(11):773-81.
doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200866. Citation on PubMed Dobson-Stone C, Velayos-Baeza A, Jansen A, Andermann F, Dubeau F, Robert F,
Summers A, Lang AE, Chouinard S, Danek A, Andermann E, Monaco AP. Identification
of a VPS13A founder mutation in French Canadian families with
chorea-acanthocytosis. Neurogenetics. 2005 Sep;6(3):151-8. doi:
10.1007/s10048-005-0220-9. Epub 2005 Sep 28. Citation on PubMed Karkheiran S, Bader B, Roohani M, Danek A, Shahidi GA. Chorea-acanthocytosis:
report of three cases from Iran. Arch Iran Med. 2012 Dec;15(12):780-2. Citation on PubMed Rampoldi L, Dobson-Stone C, Rubio JP, Danek A, Chalmers RM, Wood NW, Verellen
C, Ferrer X, Malandrini A, Fabrizi GM, Brown R, Vance J, Pericak-Vance M, Rudolf
G, Carre S, Alonso E, Manfredi M, Nemeth AH, Monaco AP. A conserved
sorting-associated protein is mutant in chorea-acanthocytosis. Nat Genet. 2001
Jun;28(2):119-20. doi: 10.1038/88821. Citation on PubMed Ueno S, Maruki Y, Nakamura M, Tomemori Y, Kamae K, Tanabe H, Yamashita Y,
Matsuda S, Kaneko S, Sano A. The gene encoding a newly discovered protein,
chorein, is mutated in chorea-acanthocytosis. Nat Genet. 2001 Jun;28(2):121-2.
doi: 10.1038/88825. Citation on PubMed Walker RH, Jung HH, Dobson-Stone C, Rampoldi L, Sano A, Tison F, Danek A.
Neurologic phenotypes associated with acanthocytosis. Neurology. 2007 Jan
9;68(2):92-8. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000250356.78092.cc. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Blood Disorders Genetic Disorders Movement Disorders Neurologic Diseases MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 1, 2020