Ophthalmo-acromelic syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Ophthalmo-acromelic syndrome URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/ophthalmo-acromelic-syndrome/ Ophthalmo-acromelic syndrome To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Ophthalmo-acromelic syndrome is a condition that results in malformations of the eyes, hands, and feet. The features of this condition are present from birth. The eyes are often absent or severely underdeveloped (anophthalmia), or they may be abnormally small ( microphthalmia ). Usually both eyes are similarly affected in this condition, but if only one eye is small or missing, the other eye may have a defect such as a gap or split in its structures ( coloboma ). The most common hand and foot malformation seen in ophthalmo-acromelic syndrome is missing fingers or toes (oligodactyly). Other frequent malformations include fingers or toes that are fused together (syndactyly) or extra fingers or toes ( polydactyly ). These skeletal malformations are often described as acromelic, meaning that they occur in the bones that are away from the center of the body. Additional skeletal abnormalities involving the long bones of the arms and legs or the spinal bones ( vertebrae ) can also occur. Affected individuals may have distinctive facial features, an opening in the lip ( cleft lip ) with or without an opening in the roof of the mouth ( cleft palate ), or intellectual disability. Frequency The prevalence of ophthalmo-acromelic syndrome is not known; approximately 35 cases have been reported in the medical literature. Causes Mutations in the SMOC1 gene cause ophthalmo-acromelic syndrome. The SMOC1 gene provides instructions for making a protein called secreted modular calcium-binding protein 1 (SMOC-1). This protein is found in basement membranes, which are thin, sheet-like structures that support cells in many tissues and help anchor cells to one another during embryonic development. The SMOC-1 protein attaches (binds) to many different proteins and is thought to regulate molecules called growth factors that stimulate the growth and development of tissues throughout the body. These growth factors play important roles in skeletal formation, normal shaping (patterning) of the limbs, as well as eye formation and development. The SMOC-1 protein also likely promotes the maturation (differentiation) of cells that build bones, called osteoblasts . SMOC1 gene mutations often result in a nonfunctional SMOC-1 protein. The loss of SMOC-1 could disrupt growth factor signaling, which would impair the normal development of the skeleton, limbs, and eyes. These changes likely underlie the anophthalmia and skeletal malformations of ophthalmo-acromelic syndrome. It is unclear how SMOC1 gene mutations lead to the other features of this condition. Some people with ophthalmo-acromelic syndrome do not have an identified mutation in the SMOC1 gene. The cause of the condition in these individuals is unknown. Learn more about the gene associated with Ophthalmo-acromelic syndrome SMOC1 Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Anophthalmia-syndactyly Anophthalmia-Waardenburg syndrome Anophthalmos with limb anomalies Anophthalmos-limb anomalies syndrome Microphthalmia with limb anomalies OAS Ophthalmoacromelic syndrome Syndactyly-anophthalmos syndrome Waardenburg anophthalmia syndrome Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Microphthalmia with limb anomalies Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Microphthalmia with limb anomalies Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM MICROPHTHALMIA WITH LIMB ANOMALIES; MLA Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Abouzeid H, Boisset G, Favez T, Youssef M, Marzouk I, Shakankiry N, Bayoumi N,
Descombes P, Agosti C, Munier FL, Schorderet DF. Mutations in the SPARC-related
modular calcium-binding protein 1 gene, SMOC1, cause waardenburg anophthalmia
syndrome. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Jan 7;88(1):92-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.12.002.
Epub 2010 Dec 30. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Gambhir PS, Gambhir SP, Bankar SM. Ophthalmoacromelic syndrome: two further
cases expanding the phenotype. Clin Dysmorphol. 2010 Apr;19(2):91-94. doi:
10.1097/MCD.0b013e328336a1a6. No abstract available. Citation on PubMed Okada I, Hamanoue H, Terada K, Tohma T, Megarbane A, Chouery E, Abou-Ghoch J,
Jalkh N, Cogulu O, Ozkinay F, Horie K, Takeda J, Furuichi T, Ikegawa S, Nishiyama
K, Miyatake S, Nishimura A, Mizuguchi T, Niikawa N, Hirahara F, Kaname T,
Yoshiura K, Tsurusaki Y, Doi H, Miyake N, Furukawa T, Matsumoto N, Saitsu H.
SMOC1 is essential for ocular and limb development in humans and mice. Am J Hum
Genet. 2011 Jan 7;88(1):30-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.11.012. Epub 2010 Dec 30. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Rainger J, van Beusekom E, Ramsay JK, McKie L, Al-Gazali L, Pallotta R,
Saponari A, Branney P, Fisher M, Morrison H, Bicknell L, Gautier P, Perry P,
Sokhi K, Sexton D, Bardakjian TM, Schneider AS, Elcioglu N, Ozkinay F, Koenig R,
Megarbane A, Semerci CN, Khan A, Zafar S, Hennekam R, Sousa SB, Ramos L,
Garavelli L, Furga AS, Wischmeijer A, Jackson IJ, Gillessen-Kaesbach G, Brunner
HG, Wieczorek D, van Bokhoven H, Fitzpatrick DR. Loss of the BMP antagonist,
SMOC-1, causes Ophthalmo-acromelic (Waardenburg Anophthalmia) syndrome in humans
and mice. PLoS Genet. 2011 Jul;7(7):e1002114. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002114.
Epub 2011 Jul 7. Erratum In: PLoS Genet. 2018 Dec 26;14(12):e1007866. doi:
10.1371/journal.pgen.1007866. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Related Health Topics Genetic Disorders Vision Impairment and Blindness MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Webbing of the fingers or toes Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 1, 2014