Glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/glutamate-formiminotransferase-deficiency/ Glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency is an inherited disorder that affects physical and mental development. There are two forms of this condition, which are distinguished by the severity of symptoms. People with the mild form of glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency have minor delays in physical and mental development and may have mild intellectual disability. They also have unusually high levels of a molecule called formiminoglutamate (FIGLU) in their urine. Individuals affected by the severe form of this disorder have profound intellectual disability and delayed development of motor skills such as sitting, standing, and walking. In addition to FIGLU in their urine, they have elevated amounts of certain B vitamins (called folates) in their blood. The severe form of glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency is also characterized by megaloblastic anemia. Megaloblastic anemia occurs when a person has a low number of red blood cells ( anemia ), and the remaining red blood cells are larger than normal ( megaloblastic ). The symptoms of this blood disorder may include decreased appetite, lack of energy, headaches, pale skin, and tingling or numbness in the hands and feet. Frequency Glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency is a rare disorder; approximately 20 affected individuals have been identified. Of these, about one-quarter have the severe form of the disorder. Everyone reported with the severe form has been of Japanese origin. The remaining individuals, who come from a variety of ethnic backgrounds,  are affected by the mild form of the condition. Causes Mutations in the FTCD gene cause glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency. The FTCD gene provides instructions for making the enzyme formiminotransferase cyclodeaminase. This enzyme is involved in the last two steps in the breakdown (metabolism) of the amino acid histidine, a building block of most proteins. It also plays a role in producing one of several forms of the vitamin folate, which has many important functions in the body. FTCD gene mutations that cause glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency reduce or eliminate the function of the enzyme. It is unclear how these changes are related to the specific health problems associated with the mild and severe forms of glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency, or why individuals are affected by one form or the other. Learn more about the gene associated with Glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency FTCD Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Arakawa syndrome 1 FIGLU-uria Formiminoglutamic aciduria Formiminotransferase deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: GLUTAMATE FORMIMINOTRANSFERASE DEFICIENCY Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Formiminoglutamic aciduria Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM GLUTAMATE FORMIMINOTRANSFERASE DEFICIENCY Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Fowler B. The folate cycle and disease in humans. Kidney Int Suppl. 2001
Feb;78:S221-9. doi: 10.1046/j.1523-1755.2001.59780221.x. Citation on PubMed Hilton JF, Christensen KE, Watkins D, Raby BA, Renaud Y, de la Luna S,
Estivill X, MacKenzie RE, Hudson TJ, Rosenblatt DS. The molecular basis of
glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency. Hum Mutat. 2003 Jul;22(1):67-73. doi:
10.1002/humu.10236. Erratum In: Hum Mutat. 2003 Nov;22(5):416. Citation on PubMed Whitehead VM. Acquired and inherited disorders of cobalamin and folate in
children. Br J Haematol. 2006 Jul;134(2):125-36. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2141.2006.06133.x. Citation on PubMed Related Health Topics Amino Acid Metabolism Disorders Genetic Brain Disorders Genetic Disorders Newborn Screening MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Genetics Megaloblastic Anemia (Image) Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated August 1, 2009