Glycogen storage disease type V: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Glycogen storage disease type V URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/glycogen-storage-disease-type-v/ Glycogen storage disease type V To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Glycogen storage disease type V (also known as GSDV or McArdle disease) is an inherited disorder caused by an inability to break down a complex sugar called glycogen in muscle cells. A lack of glycogen breakdown interferes with the function of muscle cells. People with GSDV typically experience fatigue, muscle pain, and cramps during the first few minutes of exercise (exercise intolerance). Exercise such as weight lifting or jogging usually triggers these symptoms in affected individuals. The discomfort is generally alleviated with rest. If individuals rest after brief exercise and wait for their pain to go away, they can usually resume exercising with little or no discomfort (a characteristic phenomenon known as "second wind"). Prolonged or intense exercise can cause muscle damage in people with GSDV. About half of people with GSDV experience breakdown of muscle tissue (rhabdomyolysis). In severe episodes, the destruction of muscle tissue releases a protein called myoglobin, which is filtered through the kidneys and released in the urine (myoglobinuria). Myoglobin causes the urine to be red or brown. This protein can also damage the kidneys , and it is estimated that half of those individuals with GSDV who have myoglobinuria will develop life-threatening kidney failure. The signs and symptoms of GSDV can vary significantly in affected individuals. The features of this condition typically begin in a person's teens or twenties, but they can appear anytime from infancy to adulthood. In most people with GSDV, the muscle weakness worsens over time; however, in about one-third of affected individuals, the muscle weakness is stable. Some people with GSDV experience mild symptoms such as poor stamina; others do not experience any symptoms. Frequency GSDV is a rare disorder; however, its prevalence is unknown.  In the Dallas-Fort Worth area of Texas, where the prevalence of GSDV has been studied, the condition is estimated to affect 1 in 100,000 individuals. Causes Mutations in the PYGM gene cause GSDV. The PYGM gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called myophosphorylase. This enzyme is found only in muscle cells, where it breaks down glycogen into a simpler sugar called glucose-1-phosphate. Additional steps convert glucose-1-phosphate into glucose, a simple sugar that is the main energy source for most cells. PYGM gene mutations prevent myophosphorylase from breaking down glycogen effectively. As a result, muscle cells cannot produce enough energy, so muscles become easily fatigued. Reduced energy production in muscle cells leads to the major features of GSDV. Learn more about the gene associated with Glycogen storage disease type V PYGM Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Other Names for This Condition Glycogen storage disease type 5 Glycogenosis 5 GSD type V GSD V McArdle disease McArdle syndrome McArdle type glycogen storage disease McArdle's disease Muscle glycogen phosphorylase deficiency Muscle phosphorylase deficiency Myophosphorylase deficiency PYGM deficiency Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Glycogen storage disease, type V Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Glycogen storage disease due to muscle glycogen phosphorylase deficiency Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE V; GSD5 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Aquaron R, Berge-Lefranc JL, Pellissier JF, Montfort MF, Mayan M,
Figarella-Branger D, Coquet M, Serratrice G, Pouget J. Molecular characterization
of myophosphorylase deficiency (McArdle disease) in 34 patients from Southern
France: identification of 10 new mutations. Absence of genotype-phenotype
correlation. Neuromuscul Disord. 2007 Mar;17(3):235-41. doi:
10.1016/j.nmd.2006.12.014. Epub 2007 Feb 26. Citation on PubMed Bruno C, Cassandrini D, Martinuzzi A, Toscano A, Moggio M, Morandi L, Servidei
S, Mongini T, Angelini C, Musumeci O, Comi GP, Lamperti C, Filosto M, Zara F,
Minetti C. McArdle disease: the mutation spectrum of PYGM in a large Italian
cohort. Hum Mutat. 2006 Jul;27(7):718. doi: 10.1002/humu.9434. Citation on PubMed Deschauer M, Morgenroth A, Joshi PR, Glaser D, Chinnery PF, Aasly J, Schreiber
H, Knape M, Zierz S, Vorgerd M. Analysis of spectrum and frequencies of mutations
in McArdle disease. Identification of 13 novel mutations. J Neurol. 2007
Jun;254(6):797-802. doi: 10.1007/s00415-006-0447-x. Epub 2007 Apr 3. Citation on PubMed Gurgel-Giannetti J, Nogales-Gadea G, van der Linden H Jr, Bellard TM,
Brasileiro Filho G, Giannetti AV, de Castro Concentino EL, Vainzof M. Clinical
and molecular characterization of McArdle's disease in Brazilian patients.
Neuromolecular Med. 2013 Sep;15(3):470-5. doi: 10.1007/s12017-013-8233-2. Epub
2013 May 8. Citation on PubMed Lucia A, Nogales-Gadea G, Perez M, Martin MA, Andreu AL, Arenas J. McArdle
disease: what do neurologists need to know? Nat Clin Pract Neurol. 2008
Oct;4(10):568-77. doi: 10.1038/ncpneuro0913. Citation on PubMed Lucia A, Ruiz JR, Santalla A, Nogales-Gadea G, Rubio JC, Garcia-Consuegra I,
Cabello A, Perez M, Teijeira S, Vieitez I, Navarro C, Arenas J, Martin MA, Andreu
AL. Genotypic and phenotypic features of McArdle disease: insights from the
Spanish national registry. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2012 Mar;83(3):322-8.
doi: 10.1136/jnnp-2011-301593. Epub 2012 Jan 16. Citation on PubMed Rubio JC, Garcia-Consuegra I, Nogales-Gadea G, Blazquez A, Cabello A, Lucia A,
Andreu AL, Arenas J, Martin MA. A proposed molecular diagnostic flowchart for
myophosphorylase deficiency (McArdle disease) in blood samples from Spanish
patients. Hum Mutat. 2007 Feb;28(2):203-4. doi: 10.1002/humu.9474. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Carbohydrate Metabolism Disorders Genetic Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Fatigue Genetics Rhabdomyolysis Type V glycogen storage disease Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated June 1, 2014