Frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism-17: MedlinePlus Genetics Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government
              organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
              the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
              secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia You Are Here: Home → Genetics → Genetic Conditions → Frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism-17 URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/frontotemporal-dementia-with-parkinsonism-17/ Frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism-17 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Description Frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism-17 (FTDP-17) is a brain disorder. It is part of a group of conditions, called frontotemporal dementia or frontotemporal degeneration, that are characterized by a loss of nerve cells ( neurons ) in areas of the brain called the frontal and temporal lobes. Over time, a loss of these cells can affect personality, behavior, language, and movement. The signs and symptoms of FTDP-17 usually become noticeable in a person's forties or fifties. Most affected people survive 5 to 10 years after the appearance of symptoms, although a few have survived for two decades or more. Changes in personality and behavior are often early signs of FTDP-17. These changes include a loss of inhibition, inappropriate emotional responses, restlessness, neglect of personal hygiene, and a general loss of interest in activities and events. The disease also leads to deterioration of cognitive functions (dementia), including problems with judgment, planning, and concentration. Some people with FTDP-17 develop psychiatric symptoms, including obsessive-compulsive behaviors, strongly held false beliefs (delusions), and false perceptions (hallucinations). It may become difficult for affected individuals to interact with others in a socially appropriate manner. They increasingly require help with personal care and other activities of daily living. Many people with FTDP-17 develop problems with speech and language. They may have trouble finding words, confuse one word with another (semantic paraphasias), and repeat words spoken by others (echolalia). Difficulties with speech and language worsen over time, and most affected individuals eventually lose the ability to communicate. FTDP-17 is also characterized by problems with movement that worsen over time. Many affected individuals develop features of parkinsonism, including tremors, rigidity, and unusually slow movement (bradykinesia). As the disease progresses, most affected individuals become unable to walk. Some people with FTDP-17 also have restricted up-and-down eye movement (vertical gaze palsy) and rapid abnormal movements of both eyes (saccades). Frequency The worldwide prevalence of FTDP-17 is unknown. In the Netherlands, where the disease prevalence has been studied, it is estimated to affect 1 in 1 million people. However, the disorder is likely underdiagnosed, so it may actually be more common than this estimate. FTDP-17 probably accounts for a small percentage of all cases of frontotemporal dementia. Causes FTDP-17 is caused by mutations in the MAPT gene. This gene is located on chromosome 17, which is how the disease got its name. The MAPT gene provides instructions for making a protein called tau. This protein is found throughout the nervous system, including in neurons in the brain. It is involved in assembling and stabilizing microtubules, which are rigid, hollow fibers that make up a cell's structural framework (the cytoskeleton). Microtubules help cells maintain their shape, assist in the process of cell division, and are essential for the transport of materials within cells. Mutations in the MAPT gene disrupt the normal structure and function of tau. The defective protein forms abnormal clumps within neurons and other brain cells. However, it is unclear what effect these clumps have on cell function and survival. FTDP-17 is characterized by the gradual death of cells in the frontal and temporal lobes of the brain. The frontal lobes are involved in reasoning, planning, judgment, and problem-solving, while the temporal lobes help process hearing, speech, memory, and emotion. A loss of cells in these brain regions leads to personality changes, speech difficulties, and the other features of FTDP-17. FTDP-17 is one of several related diseases known as tauopathies, which are characterized by an abnormal buildup of tau in the brain. Learn more about the gene associated with Frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism-17 MAPT Inheritance This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Other Names for This Condition DDPAC Disinhibition-dementia-parkinsonism-amytrophy complex Familial Pick's disease FTDP-17 Wilhelmsen-Lynch disease Additional Information & Resources Genetic Testing Information Genetic Testing Registry: Frontotemporal dementia Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Frontotemporal dementia Patient Support and Advocacy Resources National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM FRONTOTEMPORAL DEMENTIA 1; FTD1 Scientific Articles on PubMed PubMed References Boeve BF, Hutton M. Refining frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked
to chromosome 17: introducing FTDP-17 (MAPT) and FTDP-17 (PGRN). Arch Neurol.
2008 Apr;65(4):460-4. doi: 10.1001/archneur.65.4.460. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Cohn-Hokke PE, Elting MW, Pijnenburg YA, van Swieten JC. Genetics of dementia:
update and guidelines for the clinician. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet.
2012 Sep;159B(6):628-43. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.b.32080. Epub 2012 Jul 19. Citation on PubMed Hutton M, Lendon CL, Rizzu P, Baker M, Froelich S, Houlden H, Pickering-Brown
S, Chakraverty S, Isaacs A, Grover A, Hackett J, Adamson J, Lincoln S, Dickson D,
Davies P, Petersen RC, Stevens M, de Graaff E, Wauters E, van Baren J, Hillebrand
M, Joosse M, Kwon JM, Nowotny P, Che LK, Norton J, Morris JC, Reed LA,
Trojanowski J, Basun H, Lannfelt L, Neystat M, Fahn S, Dark F, Tannenberg T, Dodd
PR, Hayward N, Kwok JB, Schofield PR, Andreadis A, Snowden J, Craufurd D, Neary
D, Owen F, Oostra BA, Hardy J, Goate A, van Swieten J, Mann D, Lynch T, Heutink
P. Association of missense and 5'-splice-site mutations in tau with the inherited
dementia FTDP-17. Nature. 1998 Jun 18;393(6686):702-5. doi: 10.1038/31508. Citation on PubMed Ludolph AC, Kassubek J, Landwehrmeyer BG, Mandelkow E, Mandelkow EM, Burn DJ,
Caparros-Lefebvre D, Frey KA, de Yebenes JG, Gasser T, Heutink P, Hoglinger G,
Jamrozik Z, Jellinger KA, Kazantsev A, Kretzschmar H, Lang AE, Litvan I, Lucas
JJ, McGeer PL, Melquist S, Oertel W, Otto M, Paviour D, Reum T, Saint-Raymond A,
Steele JC, Tolnay M, Tumani H, van Swieten JC, Vanier MT, Vonsattel JP, Wagner S,
Wszolek ZK; Reisensburg Working Group for Tauopathies With Parkinsonism.
Tauopathies with parkinsonism: clinical spectrum, neuropathologic basis,
biological markers, and treatment options. Eur J Neurol. 2009 Mar;16(3):297-309.
doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2008.02513.x. Citation on PubMed or Free article on PubMed Central Rosso SM, Donker Kaat L, Baks T, Joosse M, de Koning I, Pijnenburg Y, de Jong
D, Dooijes D, Kamphorst W, Ravid R, Niermeijer MF, Verheij F, Kremer HP,
Scheltens P, van Duijn CM, Heutink P, van Swieten JC. Frontotemporal dementia in
The Netherlands: patient characteristics and prevalence estimates from a
population-based study. Brain. 2003 Sep;126(Pt 9):2016-22. doi:
10.1093/brain/awg204. Epub 2003 Jul 22. Citation on PubMed Spillantini MG, Van Swieten JC, Goedert M. Tau gene mutations in
frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17).
Neurogenetics. 2000 Mar;2(4):193-205. doi: 10.1007/pl00022972. Citation on PubMed van Swieten J, Spillantini MG. Hereditary frontotemporal dementia caused by
Tau gene mutations. Brain Pathol. 2007 Jan;17(1):63-73. doi:
10.1111/j.1750-3639.2007.00052.x. Citation on PubMed van Swieten JC, Stevens M, Rosso SM, Rizzu P, Joosse M, de Koning I, Kamphorst
W, Ravid R, Spillantini MG, Niermeijer, Heutink P. Phenotypic variation in
hereditary frontotemporal dementia with tau mutations. Ann Neurol. 1999
Oct;46(4):617-26. doi: 10.1002/1531-8249(199910)46:43.0.co;2-i. Citation on PubMed Enlarge image Related Health Topics Dementia Genetic Disorders Movement Disorders MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Dementia Genetics Lobes of the Brain (Image) Related Medical Tests Cognitive Testing Understanding Genetics What is the prognosis of a genetic condition? How can gene variants affect health and development? What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family? What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited? How are genetic conditions treated or managed? Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Follow us Social Media Toolkit NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated March 1, 2017